2801
RN 0 TY Science Fiction Roleplaying Game

?%5%3?? Science Fiction Roleplaying Game

IX!IIE
Bules for modern to far-future froleplctyl_ng games

by Richard Baker and Bill Shvlq-ek

~US. CANADA,

:

ASIA, PACIFIC, & LATIN AMERICA

i

Wizaxds of the Coast, Inc.

y:

P.O:Box 707

}:

Renton WA 98057-0707

EUROPEAN HEADQ! TERS

Wizards of the Ceminah-mm

PB.3˘

:i

2300 Turnhout

Belgium

+1-208-624-0833

+32-14-44-30-44

Visit our website at www.tsr.com

FOREWORD

T've been looking forward to this day. Somewhere, an SF or book stores now, looking for out-of-print titles that might
roleplaying fan is holding this book in his or her hands . ... be on my reading list. I've also found that my interest in

and that means that the ALTERNITY game is Out There, no the science behind science fiction has grown tenfold. It's

longer a stack of paper and notes on my desk but a living
and breathing game. That's a good feeling, amigo!

an astonishing universe out there. Who cares what's on TV when you can step outside on a starry night and see all the

The ALTERNITY concept took form in early 1995. Three way to the end of time? Long after I finish this project, I'm

people--Lester Smith, Dori Hein, and Bill Slavicsek--were going to take that sense of wonder with me. I hope it's the

the driving force behind the ALTERNITY proposal. They drew same for you.

up the framework under which the ALTERNITY game became

possible. They thought it ought to be done. You wouldn't be reading these words without them.
My association with the ALTERNITY game began in No-

Rich Baker
February 2, 1998

vember 1995, when [ was brought onto the team. At the We're done! It started years ago as a memo suggesting a time, Bill had the concept and the sketch of a system; my way 1o expand TSR's roleplaying audience and it became

job was to help him build a three-dimensional game from the single largest undertaking of my career.

these beginnings. So we met for hours each day through

T'm going to have to catch my breath and thank loads of

the winter of 1996, hammering out The Rules. Those in- people who helped make the ALTERNITY game come togeth-

tense skull sessions were the crucible of the game. We've
changed plenty of things since, but for the most part, the game's the same one that Bill and I worked out piece by piece in the TSR Games Library, filling notepads with dozens of pages of scribbled thoughts and mechanics.

et: Rich Baker, Lester Smith, Dori Hein, Kim Mohan, David Eckelberry, Jim Butler, Keith Strohm, Randy Post, Dee Barnett, Angie Lokotz, Paul Hanchette, Dawn Murin, Dana Knutson, Dennis Kauth, Rob Lazzaretti, Bruce Heard, Monte Cook, and Sean Reynolds. Whew! And I probably forgot

More than any other project that I've worked on at TSR, somebody! Anyway, we're done! And you know somethis game changed the way I look at things, It revitalized thing? The work is just beginning. ... . `my love of science fiction and spurred me to start tracking

down the classic or groundbreaking books I'd never gotten around to reading. [ make a point of checking out the used-

Bill Slavicsek February 2, 1998

CREDITS
Design: Richard Baker and Bill Slavicsek
Developm: Deavid Eckelberry Editing: David Eckelberry, Kim Mohan, and Keith Strohm
Creative Direction: Bill Slavicsek
Typesetting: Angelika Lokotz
Cover Art: k post Interior Art: Charles Bernard, D. Alexander Gregory, Hannibal King, Terese Nielsen, rk post,
Alan Rabinowitz, Andrew Robinson, David Seeley, Matthew Wilson Graphic Design: Dee Barnett and Matt Adelsperger Graphics Coordination: Paul Hanchette
Cartography and 3-D Art: Dennis Kauth and Rob Lazzaretti Advice: Jim Butler, Monte Cook, Bruce Heard, Sean Reynolds Special Thanks: Jim Fallone, Dori Hein, Lester Smith, James M. Ward. David Wise

ATy, Inc. AUVANCED DUNGEONS & DAcons, AD&D, and the TSR logo are roglstored trademarks owned by TSR, I TSR charactars, charactor names, and the distinctive likenssses thareof aro trademarks owned by TS, Inc. Distributed to tho book trade in the United and States by Random House, Inc. and in Canada by Randam House of Canarda, Ltd. Distributed to the hobb, toy, and comic trade in the United States
distributors. Canada by regional distributors. Distributed worldwida by Wizards of the Codst, Inc. and regional

write Inc. artwork s `This material is protocted under the copyright laws of the United States of America. Any reproduction o unauthorized use of the material or

contained herein prohibited without the oxpross

`permission of TSR,

USA. 01998 TSR, Inc. Al rights reserved. Mado in the

Inc. TSR, Inc. is a subsidiary of Wizards of the Coast, wywar.com Visit our wobsite at

First Printing May 1998

INTRODUCTION ..
How to Use This Book . CHEPTER 1: FAST-PLAY RULES
So You Want to Be the Gamemaster? Key Concepts ......... Presenting an Adventure . The Setting Using the Game Mechanic . Cauldron Station CHAPTER 2: HERO CREATION Ability Scores Ability Score Generation . Designing New Species Professions and Careers . Skill Selection . Perks & Flaws . Roleplaying Attributes .
Equipment . ...
Advanced Heroes CHAPTER % GAMEMASTERS IN ACTION
Rolling Dice . Time ..
Detection . Movement Combat .
Damage Hozards . Environments . The GRAPH System .. CHAPTER 4 SKILLS Skill Mechanics Strength Feats & Skills . Dexterity Feats & Skills . . Constitution Feats & Skills . Intelligence Feats & Skills . Will Feats & Skills ... Personality Feats & Skills . CHAPTER 5: PERKS & FLAWS Selecting Perks & Flaws Perks & Flaws in Play .

CONTENTS
4 CHAPTER §: ACHIEVEMENTS . Achievement Points .
Awards & Penalties
Advanced Heroes
Retirement

CHAPTER The Art

& RUNNING THE GAME . of Being a Gamemaster

Action vs. Style .

Scene Structure

Challenges ..

Encounters .

CHAPTER 10: VEHICLES . Vehicular Accessories
Vehicular Weapons .
Vehicular Armor . . Vehicle Combat ..........cc.enn

CHAPTER 11: SPACESHIPS Ship Construction ..
Spaceship Movement .
Spaceship Combat .

32

. CHAPTER 12: ALIEN ARTIFACTS
Antifact Acquisition

.

Artifact Design . ..

Powers & Drawbacks .

CHAPTER 13: CAMPAIGN DESIGN Designing a Campaign Progress Level . Frequency of Life .

CHAPTER 14: CAMPAIGN ARCHITECTURE
Beginning Design
Star Sectors
Star Systems .
Planets ... Designing Planets Creating Civilizations

. CHAPTER 15: ADVENTURE DESIGN Spontaneous Adventures Planned Adventures Adventure Hooks .

165 165 168

CHAPTER 6: SUPPORTING CAST .
. Creating Supporting Characters Types of Supporting Characters . Supporting Character Templates
CHAPTER 7: ATTRIBUTES Motivation ... Moral Attitude Character Traits Heroes with History Setting Characters in the Story Contacts & Allegiances . Social Status . Income & Finances .

Artificial Intelligence .
FX.
. CHAPTER 17: CREATURES & ALIENS
Animal & Alien Statistics .
Animal Compendium Alien Compendium
APPENDIX: AD&D GAME CONVERSION RULES ......
INDEX .
`GAME RECORD FORMS
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

What's your vision of the future? Do, and discovery as humanity s; the
of colonization and hope, thousand jewels in the immen
Or do you harbor darker

That's where you come in. You're about to find out what goes into

creating exciting science fiction

roleplaying adventures about

tomorrow that yo

ur

friends

WHAT IS THE

1f you think that you're ready to plunge into imaginative futures,

do anything you can think of. That's
the relationship between a player

ALTERNITY GAME?

then you'll find that the AfTERNITY and his hero in a roleplaying game

game is the perfect vehicle for your

In a roleplaying game, you don't

journey. Bring your own vision, your have a television or computer screen

B

b Aueniry Player's Handbook and RSiemaster Guide combine to form W iSleplaying game system for simulaling modsmm to far-future adven fiiros The AtreRNiTy rules will show
WHAT Is iyou how you and your friends can
teate science fiction roleplaying
ROLEPLAYING? Biories together.
Siiink of any science fiction movis #elevision show comic book, novel, o short story you've ever read--with the Aureniry rules, you can rewrite
Who Can Play? orrevisitthese amazing tales using
heroes, villains, aliens, plots, and stories of your own invention. Your imagination is the only limit, As you and play the AUTERNITY game, you Your friends will shape this vision,
explore it, expand it, and create your

own style, your own experience to the table, and get ready for the time of yourlife.
When you were young, you probably played all kinds of make-believe games such as cops and robbers or cowboys and Indians. A roleplaying game adds rules to a make-believe game: Each player creates an imaginary character and describes that character in terms of how strong, how fast, how tough, and how smart he orshe is.
Here's amother way to look at it.
Imagine that you're playing a video

to show you where your standing, which way he what's challenging him at the moment. Instead, another player-- called the Gamemaster--runs the
game. He or she tells you what the
scene looks like, what's happenin, around the hero, and other pertinent details, The Gamemaster directs the action according to i players make,
Anyone who wants to can play the AuTERNITY game, though the recommended starting age is 10. One player must be the Gamemaster. In addition to the Gamemasteyou need at least one other playe or as

own unique worlds of wonder and

game, The hero of the game is a

many as ten, but you'll find that

B 8
B

adventure.
imagine & future in which humaniy 6on fravel from star fo star, or one
i1 which humans aren't alone in the
iveree, Imagine o world in which «
few stipersecret agents fight against
5 inscen menace that masquer{iies s people-of qreat power and high station. O think of a world here the Cold War was fought with Boimbs and missiles instead of rheteric and postuting, & world ravaged by nuclear-war--how would tocs of this kind of future fry o put fhings back together again? Science fiéion is e amazingly brocd field, ex: 606 the AurERNITY game lets you Flor vous own vision of the uturo as ou wish

hulking soldier trapped in a wrecked game sessions work best with

space station with a nasty alien

groups of four to six other play:

monster. What can you make your

video hero do? He can open doors, How Do You

climb ladders, or jump to ledges as
you manipulate the control pad. You

Win?

make decisions about which way the Unlike other games, roleplaying

hero goes and which weapons he

games aren't necessarily about win

uses, thus determining the conrse of ning and losing. The goal of a role

the adventure.

playing game session is to create a

Now imagine that the video hero sati tying "group story." The Game

has the ability 1o talk to the alien

master isn't out to defeat the heroes,

monster. Maybe you can have the

and the players aren't out to "beat"

hero give the alien something so he each other. Instead, the players and

can pass by without fighting, or you

he Gamemaster interact to advance

can have him bluff his way past, con the story and find out what happens

vincing the creature that hes sup-

o the heroes from one adventur:

posed togo o th

>. Imag-

ins that the game

say,or

In this way, roleplaying games

Chapter 6: Supporting Cast covers

don't technically end. Each adventure may come to a conclusion, and a game session may run its course by

how to populate your campaign set ting by creating all the characters-- ranging from the smallest "bit

the end of the evening, but you can

players" to the most formidable

always come back to these heroes to continue the story. It's just like a tele vision show or movie sequels. An ad venture is a single episode or motion picture, but the ongoing story--called

archvillains--that your players' he roes will come into contact with dur ing their adventures. To create a particular type of character quickly, you can use the supporting character

a campaign--can continue for an en
INTRODUCTION tire broadcast season or over the course of several subsequent movies. Heroes grow and improve from ad venture to adventure, gaining more expertise and personal power as the campaign unfolds.

templates provided at the end of this chapter.
Chapter 7: Attributes goes into de tail about the relationships that can exist between heroes and other char acters in a campaign setting. What can contacts and allegiances do for

a hero, and how does a character's

Roleplaying

social status affect his ability to suc

Alternate Tomorrows
The ALTERNITY game is a comprehen sive roleplaying game with a foun dation of core rules that can be used in a variety of settings. Each of these settings is referred to as an alternate tomorrow. Your campaign can revolve around heroes in a con temporary setting who battle terror ists, superspies, and criminals of all descriptions. Or you can set your campaign 500 years in the future, allowing the heroes to explore the galaxy in fasterthanlight ships. Both of these settings and a dozen more can be used for an ALTERNITY game, creating vastly different alternate tomorrows to run adven tures in.
THHowis 1B0ooUksE
The ALTeErNITY Gamemaster Guide is designed specifically for Game masters, providing rules and advice on running game sessions and creat ing ongoing ALTERNITY campaigns. You need the ALTeRNITY Player's Hand book in order to have the complete rules package.
Getting Started
Start with Chapter I: FastPlay Rules in the Player's Handbook. After you read the fastplay rules for heroes, come back to this book and read the corresponding chapter for Game masters. It provides an overview of the Gamemaster's role and presents a short adventure that introduces

ceed in dealings with the world

you and your players game.

to the ALTERNITY

around him? Answers to these ques tions and more are in this chapter.
Chapter 8: Achievements talks

Then ...

about ways you can control the pace at which heroes advance in power as

After Chapter 1, both books go into
more detail and add more rules to build a complete roleplaying game. Remember, you only need to use the rules you and your players want. If detail and systems are what you like, it's in here. If you think that too many rules get in the way of role playing, use just what you're com fortable with.
The early chapters of the Game master Guide mirror their counter parts in the Player's Handbook-- covering the same topics, but look ing at those topics from the Game master's perspective.
Chapter 2: Hero Creation goes be yond the scope of its counterpart in the Player's Handbook, providing you with alternate ways of defining the heroes who will start their adventur ing careers in your campaign. You'll also get an overview of how to de sign an alien species, which you can use to inject variety and uniqueness into your game.
Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action is the longest chapter in this book. Most of its pages are devoted to a discussion of all the rules you'll need to run combat scenes. This is the part of the book you'll refer to most often during a game session.
Chapter 4: Skills and Chapter 5: Perks & Flaws expand upon those chapters in the Player's Handbook with tips to help you know what to do when a particular skill, perk, or flaw comes into play.

your campaign runs its course, and gives advice on what you can do when your heroes have become so powerful that it's difficult to come up with new ways to challenge them.
Chapter 9: Running the Game dis cusses the basics of how to prepare for and how to moderate a game ses sion. You'll learn about techniques you can use to make the roleplaying game experience exciting and fulfill ing for your players as well as for yourself.
Chapter 10: Vehicles is another "expansion" chapter, building on what the Player's Handbook has to say about using vehicles and run ning scenes that involve combat be tween vehicles. You'll read about special equipment that you can make available to your heroes so they can add armor, weapons, and other gear to the basic vehicle types described in the Player's Handbook.
Chapter 11: Spaceships is a com plete set of rules for designing differ ent spacecraft. In a science fiction setting, it's likely that there are as many different kinds of spaceships as there are different kinds of auto mobiles in our real world. The infor mation here will enable you and your players to create any type of spacegoing vessel you can imagine.
Chapter 12: Alien Artifacts adds an element of mystery to your game. If you use this rule system, your he roes will be able to acquire strange pieces of technology that provide them with awesome powers, while at

the same time saddling them with disadvantages or hindrances that serve as a trade-off for an artifact's wonderful benefits.
Chapter 13: Campaign Design is the start of a section of this book devoted to helping you create your own imaginary universe. You'll start by making some basic decisions about what type of science fiction selting you want to develop, and what the "ground rules" of that setting are.
Chapter 14: Campaign Architecture i the next step on the path, where you'll use charts and tables to design the stars and planets of your
campaign setting as well as the indi-
vidual nations and civilizations that exist on each world.
Chapter 15: Adventure Design adds the final level of detail to your campaign setting. You'll learn about the essential elements that any good adventure must contain, and how to put those elements together in a number of different ways to fashion situations and stories that will challenge and entertain your players.
Chapter I6: Optional Rules is partly an extension of Chapters 13, 14, and 15 in the Player's Handbook, offering tips on how to handle psionics, mutants, and cybernetics in your game. It also goes on to introduce an entirely new set of optional rules-- FX(short for "special effects"). If you want to play in a fantastic science fiction universe where characters have magical or superheroic abilities, the FX system is for you.
Chapter 17: Creatures & Aliens rounds out the features of your sci ence fiction setting by giving you
game statistics for nearly three
dozen different types of normal and not-so-normal animas.
Finally, for the benefit of those of you who are also players of the DRAGONS' ADVANCED DUNGEONS & game, we've provided a short appen-
dix with rules for converting AD&D"
characters into ALTEANITY heroes.
Tables ar Sidebars In addition to regular text, this book includes two other types of information: tables and sidebars.
Tables, most of which are made up primarily of numbers, provide a lot of statistics in an easy-to-find format. A few of the tables in this book (the ones with a "P" in front of the

D
HOILINCOHLNI

"Pleasure doing business with you!"

table number instead of a "G") also fair and consistent, but the goal is to

appear in the Player's Handbook. get on with the game quickly. Ex-

They're reprinted here because

plain your decision, don't argue, and

you're likely to want to refer to them keep the action going. Later, you can

during play.

discuss the ruling and possibly talk

A sidebar is a piece of text printed about making minor modifications if

on a blue background, separate from you think it's warranted. But in the

the regular text that runs continuous- middle of the game, rule in favor of

ly throughout each chapter. Some in- fast, exciting, and story, story, story!

formation in sidebars is associated Remember, a roleplaying game

with aspects of the rules that pop up isn't about using every rule exactly

in more than one place. Some side- as it's written. Its about having fun

bars present facts that aren't critical Use what you like in the rules, make

to the rules, but which we think

up new ones if you want, but above

you'll be interested in anyway. Side- all, apply the Rules of Common

bars are also used to make informa- Sense and Story to your game. If

tion easier o spot, so you don't have something makes sense to you, then

to scan through regular text to find it just declare that from now on that's

The sidebar in this introduction is an the way it works in your game. And i

example of this last type.

something ought to happen for the

story or adventure to advance, don't

let the rules dictate against your

judgment. Take what's presented

A bit of advice: for the game to work,
players and Gamemasters need to remember one thing--what the Gamemaster says goes. Sometimes you're going to have to interpret a rule or situation that just isn't covered in the books. That's when you

here, adapt it, make it work for your group and your playing style, and just have fun! That's what roleplaying is all about.
i you're ready to start, tur the page and begin with the Fast-Play rules!

have to make a decision. Try to be

40D
3A0EL

S0 You WanT
10 BE THE R

This chapter of the Gamemaster

Gaide provides an overview of the

Gamemaster's

role in an ALTERNITY'

lgams, It contrins o short adventure

thictt you can use to introduce your players to the game and familiarize
yourself with moderaling a roleplay-

What does @ Gamemaster

do? Ba-

sically, he presents adventures for

the players to run their herces

through, and acts as the moderator
of the rules. In this chapter, you'll

find am introduction to the AurerNiTy
BN Gome that can get you off to @ good

tazt for your first game session.

The Role

b of the

Gamemaster

BN As the Gamemaster, you have a

number of jobs to-handle during and

beiween game sessions. Unlike other

B

iypes of games that have strict rul coal with fimited situations, «

leplaying game such as the

Alrznairy game is as wide open as

ihe players imaginations. For this

tecson, the presence of-« game modB eicior (o oct s referee, story design:

#r, and narrator is essential.

T

rs interact with each

othier and the game environment

ihiough the actions of the: aac

The Gamemaster
ne, directs the ac fion, cnd plars the roles of the supporting ca: nembers

alliss, and extras who inhabit the eampaign world.
However, the Gamemaster isn't

of adventures that takes place in a single setting and focuses on the
same group of heroes. A campaign

competing against the players.

can be finite, ending after as many

When the Gamemaster and the play- adventures as necessary to tell the

srs get together fo tell fun and exciting group story, everybody wins, That's the power and appeal of roleplaying.

complete story; o it can be an on going tals, progressing like a televi sion or comic book serie:
» Group Story: While a regular

story, such as found in a mo ora

Key ConcepTs book, features a set beginning, middle, and ending, a group i story

Let's take a look at some of the key concepts behind moderating the game, ALTERNITY
» Gamemaster: The participant in the game who acts as the moderator, narating adventures and controlling chargcters who are involved in the story but aren't under the direct control of the players.
» Hero: An imaginary character
controlled by aplayer. » Supporting Cast: The other
characters who appeat in every story: frlends, enemies, and incidental characters whom the heroes interact with, Members of the supporting cast are controlled by the Gamemaster.

more dynamic. The Gamemaster has an outline that provides a series of encounters and events possible ways the adventure could end. The dynamic comes from the group--the players and Game master--who determine the course of the story and its outcome through the interaction of their imaginary characters. In a group story, no one not even the Gamemaster--knows exactly how how it all will end.
» Game Session: One di nct period of game play: a time when
you gather your friends to play
BUTERNITY game. Some adventures can be completed in a single s sion; others might require several

» Setting: The imaginary con t

sessions to reach a conclusion.

and environment within which the

heroes interact with situations.

» Adventure: A scenario in which

the heroes interactiocreate a group story. As Gamemaster, you present

an opening situation or scene (called the "trigger"). The rest of the adven-

ture unfolds through the actions of

the heroes (as dictated by their play-

ors) and the moderation of the Gamemaster {through story events

and the supporting cast).

» Campaign: A continuing series

1 PRESENTING AN ADVENTURE

A roleplaying game's action takes

<] --

place in an adventure, Within its

-- structure, the participants create the

group story. The Gamemaster's role

in the adventure centers around

>=--
p--
(="

presenting and narrating the story, portraying supporting cast members, and moving the story along at

[
[T

a satistying pace. Whether you use published adventures (such as

=- =

Cauldron Station, presented at the end of this chapter) or you create

your own epics, the Gamemaster's

Tole remains the same.

Narration
`The heroes can't perform heroic actions or daring deeds in a vacuum. They need to be involved in a story
during which they act, react, and
create a fulfilling tale. A story consists of a beginning, middle, and
an end, and each story should be
filled with conflicts and goals--in
other words, obstacles for the he-
r0es to overcome and objectives for
them to achieve. It's up to the Gamemaster to have the basics of a story ready when the game session gets under way.
Remember, though, that the story will be completed by the group-- through the actions of the heroes and their interaction with your supporting cast. The heroes play an important part in determining how a story takes shape, and you should make sure their decisions play « part in the process.
You must develop a basic plot (or use a plot from a published product), provide motivations and objec-
tives for the heroes, and have an
exciting idea for the ending. A plot requires enough background mater-
ial so that the story feels like it fits
the campaign setting. Other ele`ments that make a good basic plot include a major antagonist (the vilIain), the antagonist's nefarious scheme, and motivations to make the heroes want fo get involved. These elements come together in the adventure's opening scene-- called the trigger.
The Cauldron Station adventure
provides an example of how these elements work together.
10

Supporting Cast against the players! I anything, the

Each of the players controls one hero
at any given time. The Gamemaster
controls all other characters in the

`heroes should get a break now and then just because they're heroes. So, be impartial--don't favor the supporting cast over the heroes. That

adventure. The most important sup-
`porting cast member is the major antagonist. & good villain sets the

just decreases the all-important fun
factor for everyone involved.

mood of a story and can even make the heroes more memorable--no one

Pacing

recalls who rounded up the spaceport thugs, but everyone remembers the heroes who took down Captain Blackstar, the scourge of the Frontier!
Supporting cast members ipclude

Another aspect of presenting an adventure is the pacing of the story. The story shouldn't artificially push the heroes to meet some schedule. Instead, watch how the scenes play

the major villain; his or her associ-
ates and hired hands; the authority figures who command or employ the

out. When a scene starts to drag and the fun factor begins to flag, that's `when you step in to give the scene a

heroes; the informants, witnesses,
and shop owners the heroes interact with; and the valued friends, hirelings. and allies ready to help the

boost, How? By using the resources at your disposal--maybe have a sup-
porting character show up with some
{ip that gives the heroes a nudge in

heroes at a moment's notice. The
Gamemaster needs o be ready to

the right direction. If your players don't know what to do next and the

run these characters as they are
called upon, or to improvise as the need arises.
It's important for the Gamemaster

story is in danger of stalling,
1o you o give it new life.
Don't create an adventure
that's so complete the heroes

its up
outline
can't

to give each supporting cast mem-
ber--especially major opponents and allies--much the same consideration players give their heroes when

make any decisions without violating your plot. Start the adventure with action, and have lots of other action ideas ready to insert into the

they create them.
Some supporting cast members should be fully developed, with a

flow as the game session progresses. Use combat, challenges, encounters,
contlict, tension, humor, and mystery

complete set of skills and vital game.
statistics. Other characters, such as

to keep an adventure moving toward its dramatic conclusion.

minor opponents, experts, and by-
standers, need only the skill scores

`The basic rule for pacing is that as long as the players are having fun,

and statistics that might come into
play during a scene. For example, give a common thug a combat skill

stay in the current scene. When the action bogs down, then the Gamemaster must help the pacing by get-

or two, durability ratings, and a
`weapon; give an expert just the skill

ting things moving again.

the Rules scores needed to use his expertise on
the heroes' behalf.

Moderating

`The best part about controlling the

sFectspstasetlfAhuolptuerhatoeraregremrceepanraneyRIsemhnefrpidaongcaagcectyasoiutalo)chhnmc,iholnr,ngutehtgtused,ikatenrxeCaa(nrsmwiaapmywroTogneotat,rhrhbfnudempaieconoBecoersnsltcghfbreoterostaoqphmoa,,ariypsseOoefulsptiyltawfur,bnnahepopomlsSsyyisg-arsrweouess)pa.wyotrn,'tohiddssreHtasohaohueheoacoioedlfoasnunantr,siifenntmtnddd.peoyugavog(iirlfyoRirseqnsietivtoatueurautngiohuciccsuetetnfuemshoycssFgsltpse,gomoviatha,naueytaroc"dssptndptelehistsueWlcetaoaivaoesaeDrtncy(riifeyacannfo--hiirocngig"nepfat-r-)---td.eev--pDtjtotfcCtyrgtgthhouhhhaufooeiahoieeyeeervlmrnucreeFanfme,sGegAopGhies'niiatmLnagetrsnaenTajeammanteysumeEpemdrlotttonRdsnhse,hueNtedatat1iigcmIltimshscessTnotyhpoyahYihceacafasasttiseasihs.nehsratnttgntethieacgeenbietioagvmltsercredralimneoewu.eosaPsrdnlnieialyalatactaCuwaogf..yornayctweamfBrIearnedenduanoeraoyruecof.l'crrsteypstktacduetshhOoclisolevnoaowf.eahuHnrfoeyannasarasrtrb,Tah?tnhiypyafeodlftihgeoelsthuluuenCa'aennsearrtyttntl,edaa'eduohhesshi't.npfsprvtibtaeeesaooelaetoktnsslaonwot.nleoe-yo-,ks

they even try it? That's up to you. Make your decision based on the need to keep the story moving, your interpretation of the rules, and whether or not the action fits the story and increases everyone's en joyment of the game. Be fair and im partial in your treatment of heroes and supporting characters. Chal lenge the players and their heroes. The players want to see their heroes tested, to experience the thrill of competing against the odds and coming out on top. Heroes do this sort of thing all the time! Just make sure the players have decisions to make and options to choose from as the adventure unfolds.
If someone disagrees with a deci sion, call a time out and discuss it with the group. You still get to make the final call, but you can reduce the possibility of hard feelings if you moderate the game fairly. The goal is to tell a good group story and to have fun, not to abuse the heroes.
Sometimes the dice are just going to fall the wrong way. That's okay. But you might want to give the players a break now and then. After all, it's no fun for a player to lose a hero in a stupid and random way. Be lenient when determining the difficulty of a particular action, or change the re sult before revealing the outcome to the players. This sort of manipulation is the Gamemaster's prerogative, but use it sparingly--and always in the interest of keeping the story moving and the fun factor high.
THE SETTING
The Gamemaster determines the set ting for his campaign. Depending on the features of a particular setting (such as technology, genre, and
scope), certain portions of the rules hightech gear, psionics, and aliens, for instance--may or may not be used. For example, a spaceopera setting usually has fasterthanlight spaceships, energy weapons, and tons of nonstop action. A nearfuture technothriller setting, however, has a gritty, hardedged feel, more familiar technology, and only deals with the problems of a single world.
In the Gamemaster Guide, the process of creating seltings is dis cussed in more detail. The Cauldron Station adventure in this chapter takes place in a traditional space
opera setting.

Examples of Situation Modifiers

Short

Medium

Long

Target Has Cover

Situation

UsiIng THE GAME MECHANIC
The ALTERNITY game is built around a core mechanic that has nearly uni
versal application. All heroic actions in the game can be resolved by rolling just two dice: a control die and a situation die. A control die is always a d20 a situation die can be ad4, d6, d8, d12, or d20. Depending
on how hard or easy a particular task is, the result of the situation die is added to or subtracted from the re sult of the control die, as detailed in the Chapter 1: FastPlay Rules in the Player's Handbook.
You can use the dice in varying ways, though the mechanic is al ways the same: Roll two dice, trying to achieve a number that's equal to or less than a character's appropri ate score. If the task is associated with a skill, then the skill score is used. If it's a feat, then the associat ed Ability Score is used. In all uses of dice during a game session--ex cept when rolling for damage--low results are better than high ones.
Use the mechanic to determine the success of an attack, using an appro priate combat skill to overcome a challenge, using a physical or men

tal skill or to determine the outcome of an encounter, using a Personality skill in conjunction with good role playing.
TImhepoMrtaonstt Rule
Not every action requires a dice roll. Repeat this sentence and apply it often. When the heroes attempt nor mal, everyday tasks, they should ac complish them without consulting the dice. In heroic situations, when the outcome is in doubt and the re sult could mean life or death, then have the players roll dice.
SDitiueatioSnteps
The best tool you have as the Game master is your ability to set the odds of any given task. You can do this by adding bonuses or penalties for given situations and counting in the appropriate direction on the Situa tion Die Steps Scale (presented in Chapter 1 in the Player's Handbook). Or, if you're more inclined toward quick resolutions, simply eyeball it select the modifier that matches how difficult or easy you want the task to be.

Eyeballing

It

Modifier

Situation Die

--Putting Practice

It

Into

characters have actions remaining, they go in the same order in the Ordinary phase.

b

What do you actually do with this information? That depends. Here are

examples of both methods in action.

Use either method or a combination In the fast-play rules system, dam-

of the two, as you see fit.

RULES

» The Step-by-step Method: Mi-

age comes in three types: stun, wound, and mortal. If o character is

chele's hero, Jade, wants to take a

hit by an attack or some other dam-

shot at the villainous bounty hunter. age-causing condition, the degree of

Jade has the pistol skill, so she has a success achieved by that altack de-

base situation die of +d0. The bounty termines the type and amount of

hunter is 25 meters away from Jade, damage suffered by a character.

which is medium range (+1 step

Each of the character templates at

has FAST-PLAY pendty) for her weapon, and

the end of the Chapter 1 of the Play-

light cover (+1 step penalty). In addition, because Jade is standing alop a

ers Handbook lists some examples of weapons and armor, and includes

`moving skycar, you declare that the situation has a Good level of difficulty (+2 steps). By counting out the
steps on the Situation Die Steps

their important statistics.
@ Example: Kreet fires his 11mm charge pistol at Jade. He achieves a Good success against Jade. The

Scale, the Gamemaster determines that Jade has « final situation die of

damage range for a Good success with that weapon is d§+2w. Since

+d12. Michele rolls d20+d12, hoping to achieve a total that's equal to or less than Jade's pistol score. If she succeeds, then Jade hits her target, scoring either an Ordinary, Good, or

Kreel is a member of the supporting cast, you (as the Gamemaster) roll to
see how much damage Kreet inlicts. The most he can do s 8 points of wound damage on a roll of 6.

Amazing success. » Eyeballing It: Dave's hero, Jack
Everstar, needs to slip past the customs official. Since Everstar doesn't

Secondary Damage
Serious, lasting injuries--mortal
damage and wound damage--cause

have the sneak specially skill, his base situation die is +d4. You decide that the oficial is particularly vi

secondary damage to the character
who is injured. For every 2 points of wound damage inflicted on a char-

lant today. This makes the situation acter, that character also suffers 1

Hard, causing Everstar to take a +2 step penalty. Dave rolls d20+d8, hoping for a result equal to or less than Everstar's Stealth skill score.

point of stun damage. For every 2
points of mortal damage a character
receives, that character also suffers |
point of wound damage and | point

of stun damage.

Action Rounds

# Example: Jade returns fire with
her 1lmm charge rifle and gets an

Although actions in a phase are con- Amazing success against Kreet. The

sidered fo occur simullaneously, you damage range for an Amazing suc-

don't want everyone rolling dice at

cess with her weapon is d6+1m.

the same time. Instead, all charac- Jade's player, Michele, rolls d6 and

ters who are entitled to an action in.
the same phase should act in the order of their action check scores-- highest score first. The results of

gets a result of 4. Kreet suffers 5 points of mortal damage (4 + 1 = 5) plus secondary damage of 2 wounds and 2 stuns.

their actions (such as damage) are

applied at the end of the phase, thus Armar

simulating simultaneous activity.

Characters can wear armor to pro-

# Example: Jade, Everstar, and the tect them from the dangers of battle.

bounty hunter Kreet each achieve a Good action check result. Their ac-

Armor can reduce the primary damage a hero suffers--but armor has no

tion check scores are 13, 10, and 15, effect on secondary damage.

respectively. For ease of play, Kreet

@ Example: Jade is wearing a CF

acts first in the Good phase, followed long coat when Kreet hits Jade for 8

by Jade, then Everstar. The results of wounds. That amount of damage each character's action are applied causes 4 points of secondary stun

1 atter everyone has acted, taking offect in the Ordinary phase. If the

damage, which Michele records on
Jade's character template immedi-

ately because armor doesn't stop secondary damage. Now Michele rolls to see how well Jade's armor protected her hero from the wound damage. The CF coat blocks dd+1 points of high impact (H) damage. Michele rolls d4 and gets a resull of 3, for a total of 4 3 + 1), 5o the number of wounds is reduced by 4. Michele `marks off 4 wound boxes on Jade's character template (84 = 4).
Recovery Alter a character suffers damage, he or she can get back to full health ina number of different ways:
» Wound damage, but not mortal damage, can heal naturally at a rate of 2 wound points per week of rest and recuperation.
> The Knowledge-first aid specialty skill can heal stun damage on conscious patients, negating 2, 3, or 4 points of stun damage depending on the degree of success achieved on the skill check (Ordinary, Good, or Amazing).
First id can also be used to revive a character who was knocked out due to stun damage, Testoring 1, 2,0r 3 stun points depending on the degree of success.
This skill can be used to heal wound damage; any success restores 1 wound point.
» The Medical Science-treatment specialty skill can be used to heal stun damage on conscious patients, as per first aid above.
Medical Science-treatment can also be used to revive a character who was knocked out due to stun damage, restoring 2. 3, or 4 stun points depending on the degree of success.
This skill can be used to heal wound damage; any success restores 2 wound points.
» The Medical Science-surgery specialty skill can be used to heal wound damage and mortal damage: a success restores 1 point of mortal and 2 points of wound damage. This skill can be used on a specific patient once every hour. If a Critical Failure occurs, the patient suffers 1 additional point of mortal damage.
» Any remaining stun damage
disappears at the end of a scene.

CAULDRON STATION --

An Introductory

ALTERNITY Adventure

b

This adventure uses the fast-play gy that allows this future civilization deep beneath the planet surface.

rules to introduce Gamemasters and Only players to the ALTERNITY game. the Gamemaster should read this

to explore and travel the star lanes. Even the mines are protected so that the workers can labor safely; the

`This shait provided access to the outpost for a pair of deadly native creatures that the miners have dubbed

adventure before play begins. If

`mine shafts are drilled beneath the "moltenoids." The moltenoids invad-

players read the adventure before

protection of great pressure domes.

ago. AB1d-1564
ed the mining dome four days

their heroes get to participate in it,

The heroes come to Cauldron in

Twelve miners were killed before the

they'll ruin the fun of being surprised their traderclass starship, the Nebu- survivors managed to contain the

and spoil the group storytelling experience for everyone.

Ia Bounty, for business purposes.

creatures within the mining dome by

They have a shipment of 3D comput- sealing the airlock doors leading to §TINY

As the Gamemaster, it's your job to er programs to sell to the outpost, in- the dome.

tead through this adventure and be- cluding entertainment programs,

The creatures killed not out of ma-

come familiar with the basic plot and mood of the story. When you're

news and technical journals, and the liciousness, to acquire food, or to

Iatest Grid interactives to cheer up

protect themselves, but just as a

ready, lot the players choose heroes the recreation-starved miners. In ad- byproduct of their alien physiology

from those in Chapter I: Fast-Play Rules or create their own heroes using the complete rules in Chapter

dition, they plan to fill their cargo holds with processed ore. The construction projects going on in other

(see "The Supporting Cast" on page 18 of this chapter). The miners theorized that, since these creatures live

2in the Player's Handbook. Encour- nearby star systems are in desperate in extremely hot conditions, lowering

age the players to assemble a bal- need of quality ore--and they're will- the temperature inside the mining

anced group of heroes, with at lecst ing to pay extremely well for it.

dome would drive the beasts back

one representative

from each of the

Unfortunately, a few events com- into the shaft, which could then be

professions. The heroes will need

bine to make this particular mission sealed.

brains, brawn, and negotiating skills alot more hazardous than usual.

Instead of returning to the shaft,

tosurvive the challenges of Caul-

» First, the region of Cauldron however, the beasts created a differ-

dron Station.

housing the outpost is experiencing ent exit. The moltenoids melted «

a powertul magnetic storm. Commu- path through an emergency closet

Background

nications into and out of the base

and into the conduit vents within the

have been disrupted by the magnetic station's insulated walls. From these

This adventure takes place in a far-

activity, so the heroes must make

conduits, the creatures gained al-

future, space-opera setting. The he- their approach without any help

most total access to the outpost.

10es have access to a number of

from the outpost traffic beacons.

More deaths and many injuries

high-tech tools that don't exist in the

» Second, the storm plays havoc followed. The station administrator

current day and age. In addition, the with the ship's sensors, so the vessel and the securiy officer eventually

tone is heroic, larger than life, and

passes through a spume of molten

decided to seal off this wing of the

fits in neatly with your favorite science fiction film epic.

molybdenum expelled by one of the outpost from the rest of the station. planet's many active volcanoes. This That was two days ago. About a day

Cauldron Station is a mining out- superheated liquid metal clogs the later, one of the creatures reached

post on the isolated planet known as ship's tachyon intakes. While this

the power reactor and shorted out

Cauldron. The name fits the world
very well. Cauldron s literally a

doesn't hinder the ship's normal per- most of the station. Now, with total formance, it does make it impossible life support collapse set to occur in

hellish place, as it orbits exceeding- for the vessel to starfall--to travel at six hours, the station is on the verge

Iy close to its star and has a high vol- faster-than-light speed.

of death--as are all the miners and

ume of volcanic activity. Even in the

» Third, the outpost has its own station personnel trapped within.

relative coolness of a giant canyon, problem. Two creatures native to

Cauldron Station endures temperatures of 500° C during the heat of the
day. Through the wonders of far-fu-

Cauldron's environs have invaded the outpost, knocking out power and killing a significant number of min-

Adventure Outline

ture technology, the mining outpost protects its workers from the deadly
environment, allowing them to reap
the profits their processed ores bring
on the open market.
The station is a self-sustaining, to-
tally enclosed system that holds a
comfortable environment within its insulated walls and pressure domes.
Itkeeps the heat and toxic atmos-
phere out, using the same technolo-

ers. Because of the disruption in
communications, the herces don't
know about this problem ahead of time. They'll discover it as they ex-
plore the station.
Recent Events
What's been happening within Cauldron Station? The miners extended a shait that opened into a lava flow

Cauldron Station presents three obstacles that the heroes must over-
come: the damage to their ship, the
station's power outage, and the invading creatures. The action is broken down into an opening trigger and three scenes, as well as additional events based on the map (see page 17 of this chapter) that can be used or ignored as you see fit.

13

-- » Trigger: The adventure begins after the heroes land on Cauldron and enter the airlock that leads into b the station. Three guards, led by sta-

tion security officer Birrden, set an
ambush for the heroes. They see the heroes as unknown invaders, perhaps pirates or smugglers seeking to
RULES
profit during the station's current cri-
sis. The opening scene of the adventure definitely has the potential to become a combat scene, although

the heroes can negotiate with Birr-

den if they are so inclined (turning it

into an encounter scene).

FAST-PLAY

» Encounter Scene: Station Ad-

ministrator Crowell has gathered the

other survivors in the ore storage

bay. With the temperature rising and
the air getting less breathable with every passing hour, Crowell and his lot are getting closer and closer to `panic. They have no surviving technicians, no one with any hope of repairing the life support system. They do have something the moltenoids want, however, which the heroes can use in various ways if they are so inclined, The problem is, Crowell and

his band refuse to open the storage bay airlock. The heroes will have to enter by force or--the preferred `method--negotiate until Crowell is talked back to his senses.
> Combat Scene: Two moltenoids are loose in the facility. No matter how iriendly the heroes might want to be, the only viable way to deal with these creatures is either to destroy them or otherwise render them helpless so they can be removed from the station without further harm befalling the miners. One of the creatures must be forcibly removed irom the lair it has established in the engineering center before power can

be restored to the station. The other
creature roams through the wing, in-

flicting damage simply due to the heat of its passage. The heroes

might decide to hunt the beast or set
traps for it (possibly using the material provided by Crowell from the ore bay).
» Challenge Scene: It is critically

important to get the life support sys-
tem back on line. To do this, the heroes must remove the resident moltenoid from the engineering center, repair the damaged power generator, and enter the conduits beneath the station to reinitialize the life support system. This requires a
14combination of technical skills and

hands-on labor--while possibly

damage. If a character fails the

keeping one or more of the creatures check or a Critical Failure occurs, he

at bay.

sulfers 1 or 2 points of stun damage,

respectively. Wearing an e-suit (see

The Supporting
Cast

below) eliminates the need for such checks.
Airlocks must be opened manual-

`The facing page contains essential
information about the four types of supporting cast members that play «
part in this adventure: two unique
characters, Birrden and Crowell; the group of surviving miners, all considered identical for the sake of sim-
plicity; and the two moltenoids that

1y, but no airlock can be opened if another airlock connected to the
same area is already open. The air-
locks to areas 7, 8, and 9 have been sealed. These seals can be removed with the proper tools and an hour of work. (Area 8is the only one of these places that the characters should

have entered the station, both de-

`want to gain access to, and there's

scribed with a single set of statistics. These characters are controlled and portrayed by the Gamemaster. Feel iree to expand upon their motiva-

another easier way to get in; see the
description below) Conduits containing wiring, vents,
and other machinery run beneath the

tions and behavior as dictated by the {loors of the station and inside the

way the adventure unfolds.

insulated walls. The moltenoids use

`The numbers in brackets following some of a character's Ability Scores represent resistance moditiers. In the list of skills each character possesses, the number in brackets following a skill name is the character's skill score--the dice

these conduits to travel throughout the wing shown on the map. Note that no conduits run beneath the mining dome (area 9) or the storage bay (area 8). Only the insulated wall provides secret access to these areas. Characters can enter the con-

result needed to get an Ordinary

duits, but they can't travel through

success. If a character has a specialty skill, that skill name and the skill

them as easily as the moltenoids can.

score associated with it are printed in italic type immediately after the broad skill to which the specialty skill is related.

Most computer stations in the fa-
cility are inoperative due to the power outage. Only computers in the operations center (area 4) and the engineering center (area 6) can be.

The Station
Important locations within this wing

used, thanks to emergency power supplies in these rooms. Birrden, Crowell, or an operating computer

of Cauldron Station are depicted in

can tell the heroes about the state of

the map on page 17. Refer to that map the facility and the impending time. as you read the following informa- limit.

tion, so you can familiarize yourself

» Area I: This access tunnel leads

with the environment. Don't show the from the landing pads, where the hemap to your players, unless they suc- roes have docked their starship. A

ceed in obtaining it by using one of

transport carries them from the pads

the station's computers (see the text in
the next column concerning area 4).
Cauldron Station is in bad shape.

to the airlock, which must be opened `manually.
» Area 2: These four airlock cham-

Since the power cut out, the tempera- bers protect the wing from possible ture has risen to 39°C (102°F) and the environment breaches.

air has grown stale. In six hours, the

» Area 3: This transport tunnel al-

interior will heat to deadly tempera- lows the vehicles to service the stor-

tures and the atmosphere will turn

age bay, the mining dome, and the

toxic. If the power is restored before landing pads.

the six hours expire, the station can

» Area 4: Base operations serves

be saved. Until then, emergency

as the command center of the sta-

lights barely illuminate the facility tion. Using the Knowledge-computer

and the heat grows steadily worse.

operation skill, heroes can learn the

Because of the poor environmen- current condition of the station (Ordi-

tal conditions, every hour characters nary success), call up the schematics must make a successful Stamina---- for repairing the power generator

endurance skill check to fend off

and reinitializing the life support system (Good success), or access de-

Administrator Crowell

Moltenoids

--tails about the mining operation, inventory, and @ map of the station (Amatzing success).

p

» Area 5: This medical center contains various medical supplies, in-

cluding six trauma packs. Using a

trauma pack provides a -2 bonus on any Knowledge-first aid skill check, RULES or a3 bonus on any Medical Sci-

ence skill check for the purpose of

healing damage. Each trauma pack

can be used six limes before its contents become depleted.
» Area 6: The engineering center

contains the station's power genera-

FAST-PLAY tor, control computers, and access to

the life support system located in the conduits beneath this room. One

moltenoid has set up a lair in this area by melting a hole into the wall

to the north of the power generator.

» Area 7: The airlock leading into

this area has been sealed to protect the living quarters of the station

from the creatures currently loose in

the mining wing.

» Area 8: The ore storage bay contains both raw and processed ore. There are no conduits beneath the

floor of this area. Crowell and six

miners have commandeered this area, sealing the airlock and fending

off frequent attacks by the molten-

ids. Cartons of what Crowell calls

re gold." mined from the same

shaft the creatures emerged from,

lure the moltenoids, since the material is food they need to survive. A melted hole in the insulated wall, to

the south of the airlock, is the route

the creatures use to reach the stored

cartons.
» Area 9: The mining dome provides laborers with protection from the hostile environment. Shatts and `mining equipment are located all around this area. The heroes should
not be concerned with entering this
area, unless they come up with « way to get the moltenoids back into the shaft they emerged from.
» Emergency Closets: Marked "E" on the map, each of these cabinets when fully equipped contains four esuits, two trauma packs, and other emergency supplies. The closet with-
in area 6 also contains components
needed to repair the power generator. This closet can only be opened by using Crowell's security card. The
contents of many of the closets may
have already been used, at your dis-

cretion.
16 An o-suit protects its wearer from the adverse effects of the harsh envi-

ronment inside the station, providing the closet in area 6. This closet con-

an air supply and insulation from

tains the components necessary to

the heat. Characters wearing e-suits repair the power generator. Crowell

don't need to check for stun damage also knows where components are

from the heat inside the station. If

stored that can be used to repair the

character wearing an e-suit suffers heroes' ship.

wound or mortal damage from an at-

1f Birrden or any of her security de-

tack, the suit loses its ability to pro-

tail aren't available to provide this

tect its wearer from heat.

information, the heroes will have to

stumble upon the locked bay on their

Trigger Scene
When the heroes enter area 2 on the cast side of the map to begin the ad-

own. The airlock leading to area 6 shows signs of exireme damage-- the alloy has been melted and scarred by what seem to be claw

venture, read the following to the

marks, but the material appears to

players:

have been too tough to get through.

Its uncomfortably hot and the air The wall to the north of the airlock is

has a stale smell to it even after the another matter. A passage has been

airlock cycles closed. Emergency lighting provides the only source of

melted into the insulated wall, and something very hot has apparently

illumination. Four closets line the

moved through the conduit. Melted

chamber, and a second airlock leads wires, scorched pipes, and other

into the station. No one has arrived to greet you, and the place has an

signs of intense heat mark the walls of the passage.

abandoned, dead feel fo it.

The heroes can meet up with

Birrden and three miners who

Crowell in one of three ways. If Birr-

have been deputized into a security detail wait in ambush in two of the closets, one on each side of the cham-

den convinces them to seek out Crowell, she gives them the frequency of his comm gear. They can talk to

ber. They are wearing e-suits. Have him via the comm device. If not, they

the heroes make action checks to start the scene. They receive a +1 step.

can try to get his attention by bang-
ing on the airlock, or they can use

penalty because of the ambush.

the conduit tunnel to enter the bay.

Make one action check for the entire

Crowell has an 11mm charge pis-

security detail, using Birrden's action tol that he isn't afraid to fire. He's

check score.

used it against the creatures, and

Birrden thinks that the heroes are pirates or smugglers infiltrating the station. She has ordered the miners

he'll use it on the heroes if they don't calm him down and earn his trust. He's paranoid, jealously protective of

to help her subdue the invaders,

the fire gold, and unwilling to part

using their clublike tools while she with components to fix the heroes'

wields her stutter pistol. After a

ship.

round of combat, the heroes can con- The heroes can bargain with

vince her to stop fighting--if they put Crowell, or they can bluff him into

down their weapons and surrender. assisting them. During negotiations,

Otherwise, Birrden fights until she is the heroes must accumulate six suc-

defeated. The miners surrender as

cesses through their chosen form of

soon as Birrden falls.

interaction to win Crowell's trust,

The trigger scene ends with the

(Each time a character attempts a

heroes defeating or teaming up with bargain or bluff skill check, an Ordi-

Birrden, or with them being captured nary result counts as one success, @

by the security detail. If captured, they can later explain who they are and will then be recruited to help

Good result as two, and an Amazing result as three successes. If the character gets a Failure result, he must

save the station.

start over) Combine dice rolls with

roleplaying when running this

Encounter Scene scene. Or, they can simply decide to over-

Birrden eventually explains that Administrator Crowell and a handful of miners have barricaded themselves

power Crowell and his band. Each miner has a clublike tool o use in his or her defense. By the end of this

inside the ore storage bay. She'd like
the heroes to talk to Crowell and get him to come out of hiding and help.

scene, the heroes should accomplish the following things:
» Learn that the moltenoids are

They need his security card to open attracted to the fire gold. (A large

--
p
A#1d-1584
STINk

portion of the liquid metal is missing from a broken carton, because a moltenoid consumed it.)
» Obtain Crowell's security card that opens the closet in area 6. » Secure Crowell's promise that spare parts will be supplied to repair their ship. (He won't turn these over until the station has been made safe.)
Combat Scene
The primary combat scene occurs in the engineering room (area 6), where one of the moltenoids has established a lair. The heroes can lure the creature into the open with fire gold;
they can use fire gold to set trap; or
they cam simply enter the chamber with weapons blazing.
The creature's lair is @ burrow that has been melted into the thick insulated wall that surrounds the station's power generator. The intense heat has damaged compo nents within the generator that must be replaced before power can be brought back on line. If the heroes don't hure the moltenoid out in some way, they'll have to enter the burrow tobattle the creature. A shorl,
meter-wide tunnel opens into a

2-by-4-meter chamber carved in the insulated wall to the north of the generator. The beast fights to defend itself and its lair, using its sharp claws and the heat of its body.
The second creature can be used 1o create suspense and build terror. It can emerge rom the dark station corridors or arise from within the melt ed-out walls to hound, harry, and attack the heroes. Or, they can decide to hunt down the creature, dispens-
ing with it before trying to restore
power to the station. If neither of
these events occurs, then the creature
appears during the challenge scene--adding an element of combat for some of the heroes to deal with while the others work to fix the life support system
Challenge Scene
In the end, this is the most important scene of the adventure. To save the miners (those still in this wing as well as those barricaded in the living section), the heroes must restore power and reinitialize the life support system. If they have obtained the parts stored in the closet in area 6, and managed to call up schematic

diagrams on one of the operational
computers, the heroes can repair the
generator. This requires the Technical Science skill. If a hero is using the juryrig specialty or just the broad skill, he or she must achieve eight successes. If the repair specialty is used, the number of successes needed is reduced to six. (See "Encounter Scene" above for how to count up accumulated successes.)
When the proper number of successes has been achieved, the air vents hiss and the lights come back on. The temperature begins to drop slowly. The station is saved!

Aftermath

In the length of time it has taken

them to set things right at the sta-

tion, the heroes have turned from in-

truders into celebrities. They are

provided with all the parts they need

to fix their ship, and they may go on

their way soon thereafter.

Or. perhaps your group story still

has tales to be told. If you and your

players are having fun and you want

1o extend the adventure at Cauldron

Station, keep on playing and see what happens!

17

On Hero Creation

~ nothave agood eye for shooting or for completing detailed work. On the other hand, a hero with a good Dexrity score tends to be graceful, quick, and agile.
Dexterity is prime Ability Score the Free Agent profession. It's also crucial to any character involved in
agunfight, because many of the
`most useful combat skills use a
hero's Dexterity score. Even the most
muscle-bound Combat Spec needs a
decent Dexterity in order to target an
Constitution
Constitution measures health, durability, toughness, and general grit.
Like Dexterity, this physical attribute
isn't easy to quantify. Try looking at a hero's Constitution score and asking these questions: How often does he get sick? How far could he jog before "he'd have to stop and catch his breath? How easily does he shake oft
injuries? A character with a low
score is weak in one of these areas, You may find it hard to tell the dif-
ference between Strength and Constitution, Where does one Ability start and the other stop? Constitution Tefers fo resistance to physical ordedls. How much punishment can he take before his body fails him? A
hero or villain with a high Strength
and alow Constitution may be out of shape, @ heavy smoker, or lacking in
the ability to push himself for the
best results. The reverse describes a person without great physical gifts
`who makes an effort to keep himself
in shape or manifests surprising resilience in the face of hardship.
Constitution is critical to any

~ Ability Score character, whether a hero or support-

ing cast member, since it directly governs the amount of damage one

Scale

b can withstand; stun, wound, fatigue. If you're wondering just how unusual and mortal ratings depend directly characters with scores of 4 or 14 real-

on the Constitution score.

ly are, take a look at the chart below.

It offers « mathematical overview of

the kid can stay out of trouble when
the villains attack. The child's stats `might look like this:

STRS INT6

DEX9 WIL6

CON 5 PER7

Intelligence Intelligence measures key mental

Ability Scores and might help you understand the implications of high or low Ability Scores.

Low mental stats don't necessarily indicate that the child is dum] just means that he doesn't have the

CRERTION characteristics such as raw reasoning power and breadth and extent of

Ability

You're in

education or experience of an adult. He might develop into an incredibly

education. An unbiased IQ test, one
that didn't assume any educational

Score Odds the Top 4 1in3%@% 100%

intelligent adult in a few years.

HERD

or cultural background, might mea-

sure reasoning power. Education is

5 2in3%0E% 9% 6 3in3@O% 9%

Age

routinely measured through a variety of examinations.
Intelligence is a prime Ability

7 4in3(11% 8% 8 SindB(4%) 7% 9 6in36(16% 8%

As intelligent species mature and age, their physical and mental capabilities change. Older members of

Score for Tech Ops. However, it is

10 5in36(4%) 42% these species may slow down physi-

useful for heroes of any career or

11 4in3(1%

28% cally, but gain wisdom and life expe-

type, since it governs the number of skills with which they begin play.

12 3in3%6E% 17% 13 2in36(6%) %

rience. If you run a long-lived
campaign in which the heroes age

14 1in36(3%) %

and change with the passage of

Will

time, account for these changes by
Odds refer to the chance of rolling modilying the characters' Ability

Will represents mental fortitude,
faith, strength of character, willpower, determination, discipline, and intuition. [t measures how well hero reads the character of others, and it demonstrates how attuned a hero is to his surroundings.
`Will is the primary Ability Score of the optional Mindwalker profession.
Will also serves as the basis for a hero's Awareness skill, which allows `him to detect threats, read character, and generally spot or avoid ugly surprises in the course of an adventure.

that exact Ability Score using the 2d6+2 method. (See page 22)
You're in the Top describes where ahero's score fits in the general demographics of the game universe. A `hero with an Intelligence of 12 falls in the top 17% of the population.
`The typical adult humen character averages 9 in each Ability Score. This is alittle less than the typical hero character, who averages 10 in each score. However, just like heroes, supporting characters possess
strengths and weaknesses. For in-

Scores. These modifications can't
allow characters to exceed species
`minimums or maximums.

Adolescent: -1 STR, +1 DEX,

-1INT, -1 WIL

Young Adult: No modifications

Mature:

+1INT, +1 PER

Middle-Aged: -1DEX, +1INT,

+1 WIL

Old:

-1STR,-1CON,

-1DEX, +1 WIL,

Ancient:

+1 PER
~1STR, -1 CON,

It the optional psionic powers de-

stance, a low-class thug needs

-1DEX

scribed under the Mindwalker profession are used, Will represents the first line of defense against mental influences and attacks.

Strength and Dexterity for winning fights, but doesnt need Intelligence or Will for performing technical or managerial work. Consequently, the

Most herces begin play as young adults. If your players see their characters as unusually young or old,

Personality

thug's scores probably run something like this:

you may allow them to apply the adolescent or mature modifiers to

Personality measures charisma, appearance, leadership, and magnetism. Physical beauty is only a small

STR 11 INT7

DEX 10 CON 11
WIL7 PERS

`portion of a person's Personality
: although looks are important al impressions, the way in
which & person expresses himself, listens to others, and interacts with

On the other hand, o supporting character who works as a research
chemist requires very high mental
scores. His Ability Scores may read:

society is far more influential.

STR6 DEX 9 CON6

Personality is the primary Ability
Score for Diplomat heroes. Personali-

INT 12

WIL 12

PERS

ty scores also determine how many last resort points a hero starts play with, and how many last resort
points a hero can possess at any
A given time.

Finally, not all characters are average; consider a young child such as a level-headed 8-year old. Gener-
ally, you won't need to know how
tough the child is in a fight, but you might need to know whether or not

their Ability Scores. How long do characters live? Gen-
erally, as long as you want them to. If you decide to monitor age closely in your game, refer to TasLe G1: AGE table CATEGORIES BY SPECES. The shows the baseline age breakpoints for heroes and supporting cast members of different Progress Levels. As technology progresses, the lifespan of each species increases. This simulates the availability of medical technology, nutritional and dietary advances, and environmental integrity that work to slow or even re-
verse the aging process.
Table G1 uses the Earth-based solar calendar to measure years. Not

Progress Level 0-3
12 15 28 a1 s0 +2di2
17 EC) s0 78 L] +2di2

ABLE G1: AGE CATEGORIES BY SPECIES

15 21 3s 51 63 +2di2
22 a9 77 us 176 +3d12

Human.:

17

17

25

EL

a0

79

62

130

85

153

s2di2

+3d12

Fraal.

a7

a7

51

85

100

136

153

205

225

287

+2d20 +3d20

Mechalu:

23

23

a1

57

69

as

aa

134

123

178

+3d12 +adi2

Sesheyan

18

18

El

37

a8

&2

69

/

a1

123

+2di2 +3d12

10

=]

20

a5

as

a0

s1

65

1

88

+a8

+dB

15
Erd
64 aa
na +Rdi2

15
as
76 ns
151 +3d12

15
55
83 121
167 +aa12

all species use the Earth standard to you shouldn't feel s though you're

measure their age. Thus, a middle- required to retire one of your players'

aged sesheyan might offer a differ- favorite heroes just because he's be-

ent number if asked his age. If you come a bit long in the tooth. Any-

need to determine the maximum

thing can happen.

litespan of a hero or supporting cast

ABILITY member, simply check the ancient
age category. roll the listed dice, and

ScoRE add the result to the number given
for the old category. For example, the

Gamemaster wants to find out the natural lifespan of Gryldach, a
weren mercenary in his PL 7 cam-
paign. He then rolls 3d12 (getting 12) and adds the score to 151 (for total of 163 years, in this case).
Few campaigns ever span a

GENERATION
Determining the method by which your players generate their heroes' Ability Scores is an important decision. The following tex! gives you several methods to choose from.

length of time that a hero dies of old age. However, a time-hopping ad venture might bring heroes face-toface with younger or older versions

Assigned
Scores

Ability

of themselves. For that matter, the

The method described in Chapter 2:

time travel process itself might age Hero Creation in the Player's Hand-

or rejuvenate the heroes. Relativity book details the preferred route for

can be a great excuse for advancing creating new heroes. This method al-

the age of some heroes while the

lows a player to assign 60 points

story continues,

among the various Ability Scores

Finally, advanced medical tech-

You don't even have to be present

nology or secret genetic experiments when the player puts his character

might reverse the aging process.

together--just review the hero sheet

Since heroes tend to blunder into sit- once the player finishes selecting his

uations like this fairly frequently, profession, career, and skills.

The assigned score method has the advantage of leveling the playing field. All heroes are created equal, and every player has a fair chance to individualize Ability Scores as desired.
One downside of the assigned
score method is that it lends itself to
min/maxing. Min/maxing is the prac-
tice of building a hero to gain the
most benefits from the rules system
while minimizing disadvantages
and vulnerabilities. For example, a
player may set his Tech Op hero's Constitution score at § because he
intends to stay out of harm's way as
much as possible. You should expect alittle min/maxing, but when you see every one of your players following the same course, you might want 1o suggest building a better-bal-
anced party.

Random Ability
Scores
Using this method, a player rolls 2d6+2 for each of his hero's Ability
Scores. Of course, random genera-
tion is, well, random. It's possible that a hero or villain rolled up this way could have Ability Scores set at 5016, or he could get a battery of Ability Scores at 11 or higher
Fortunately, you have tool avail. able for dealing with heroes who pos-
sess scores that are too low for your
campaign. A hero without amy Ability
Scores of 11 or higher can raise one
score of his choice to 11. Obviously,
it's best for the hero to raise the low.
est of his or her Ability Scores.

~

[

Diplomat

Free Agent Tech Op

Mindwalker

B

STR 10+d4

STR 4+d8

STR 6+d6

STR 4+d6 STR 4+d6

DEX B+d4

DEX 4+dB

DEX 10+d4

DEX 8+dB6

DEX 4+d8

CON 8+d6

CON 4+d8

CON 6+d6

CON 4+d6 CON 8+d6

083K

INT 4+d8

INT 8+d6

INT 8+d6

INT 10+d4

INT 8+d6

WIL 6+d6

WIL B+dB

WIL 6+d6

WIL 8+db6 WIL 10+d4

PER 4+dB

PER 10+d4 PER 6+d6

PER 6+d6 PER 6+d6

li none of the scores that are left

ties to it a specific profession. On

gener- You can use this system to

NOILGIHD

are 9 or better, the player can bump the other hand, requiring a player to ate random characters of the appro

another score of his choice--proba- arrange the scores in the order he

priate species. This system strongly

bly the second worst--to 9. This

rolls them can help a player decide steers aliens toward their respective

guarantees that the hero qualifies what kind of character to play when archetypes--weren almost always

fora profession, and that the player he doesn't know what he wants to

come out as Combat Specs, se

has a viable character for the game. create.

sheyans as Free Agents, mechalus

You can also use this rule to "power

and t'sa as Tech Ops, and fraal as

up" villains or other supporting cast Alternate Method |

Diplomats.

members. What about heroes that roll an as-

You may have a player in your group who knows that he wants to run a

Alternate Method

tonishing set of Ability Scores? You Combat Specialist or a Free Agent. You may find that a 2d6+2 roll is too

can tone down a character to a level Using the method detailed on TaBLE unpredictable lor your tastes, but

appropriate for your campaign. Sim- G2: RANDOM ABILITIES BY PROFESSION, you don't like the way players skimp

ply have your players prune their

hero automatically begins with the

on some Ability Scores when assign-

characters' Ability Scores until they scores necessary to qualify for a spe- ing their points. In this alternative,

all under the reasonable limits that cific profession.

heroes begin with base scores of § in

you desire. For example, most play-

This method is also useful for

all six Ability Scores. The player

ers will understand if you limit their building supporting characters

then rolls 7 six-sided dice. The play

hero to asingle score of 14, two

quickly. If you don't want to spend

er adds the result of each die to any

scores of 13, and three scores of 12. too much time thinking about which Ability Score he wishes. Players

# Example: Cindi rolls a charac- combination of Ability Scores will

can't split a die result--they must

ter with the following scores: 14, 13, provide you with the perfect villain add one whole die roll to one score

13,13, 12, 12. The Gamemaster can

or supporting cast member, try

though they can add multiple die

ask her to change one 13 to @ 12 in

tolling the character's Ability Scores rolls to a single score. Species mini-

order to meet the Ability Score maxi- with this system. Species minimums mums and maximums apply.

mums. If Cindi's character had six

and maximums still apply.

This system allows a player to

scores of 14 (an unlikely roll, by the way) the Gamemaster could require

Alternate

Method 11

steer a character toward specilic
strengths and weaknesses without

her to drop two to 13 and three to 12. Other players may want to create a

assigning exact numbers, You may

You can decide if players can

hero belonging to a specific species. find this system useful, as it enables

place randomly generated Ability The dice generation system shown you to create villains and supporting

Scores in any order, or if they must

BY on TABLE G3: RANDOM ABILITIES

cast members who possess defined

assign the scores in the order they're SpeciEs, quarantees a workable char- strengths and weaknesses.

wolled. The advantage to arranging acter of the appropriate species. It

# Example: Bruce wanls to create

the scores to the player's taste is that also ensures that the alien qualifies a Combat Spec with lightning speed.

the player can tailor his hero's abili- for at least one profession.

He rolls 7d6 and comes up with 2, 2,

Fraal
STR 3+d6
DEX 5+d6

TABLE G3: RANDOM ABILITIES BY SPECIES

Mechalus STR 8+d6
DEX 8+d6 CON 4+d8
INT 11+d4 WIL 5+d6 PER 3+d8

Weren STR 10+d6
DEX 4+d6 CON 9+d6
INT 4+d8 WIL 4+d6 PER 5+d6

Sesheyan STR 6+d6 DEX 11+d4 CON 4+d6 INT 4+dB8 WIL 7+d8 PER 6:d6

T'sa
STR 3+d6
DEX 10+d6
CON 4+d6 INT 10+d4 WIL 4+d8 PER 7+d6

~ 2,3, 4,5, and 5. In order to qualify as a Combat Spec, he needs a Strength

of 11 and a Constitution of 9. Bruce

B

also wants a high Dexterity. Here's

how he assigns the dice:

Strength:

S5+4+2=11

Dexterity:

$§+5+43=13

Constitution: 5+5=10

Intelligence: 5+2=7

CREATION

Will:

S

Personality: 542=7

Bruce chose not to assign any dice

HERQ

to his Will score, and he doubled up

on the dice he assigned to Strength

and Dexterity.

Other Building
Methods While the method you choose for generating Ability Scores is one way to customize your campaign, heroes aren't defined by Ability Scores
alone. The hero's choice of profession and the skills he chooses are every bit as important.
Here's another way to build a character: have the players pick the skills they think the hero needs be fore assigning a single Ability Score. After the players create a package of four or five broad skills that define their heroes' talents, you can deter mine which professions and Ability Scores match these skills. Assigning Ability Scores is a simple process once the player knows what his hero should be good at.
For example, let's say one of your players wants Modern Ranged Weapons, Manipulation, Acrobatics, Deception, and Stealth. He's thinking of a superspy of some kind. Since
four out of his five broad skills rely on Dexterity, he'll want a good Dex terity score. Several of his skills are tied to the Free Agent profession. This player should consider creating a Free Agent character and aiming for the highest Dexterity possible.
Gamemasters interested in adding new dimensions to their players' heroes or their supporting cast members should see "FX" in Chapter 16: Optional Rules. The rules there allow more unusual and more powerful heroes to enter your cam
paign.

24

DEsIGNING
NEW SPECIES
Science fiction contains myriads of extraterrestrial creatures. Some pass for human, moving unseen through
the circles of our own society. Others are predatory creatures far stronger, smarter, or faster than the most hero ic human protagonists. A great num ber seem to be little more than humans in funny suits, creatures whose alien appearance masks an allegorical illustration of a particu lar human fault or virtue.
Players can create alien heroes. The five alien species presented in the Player's Handbook are not the only extraterrestrial species open to players they're simply examples of alien races appropriate to a general science fiction setting. If you don't
think these aliens fit into the type of
game you want to run, you can de
clare one or all of them off limits to your players. Similarly, you can de velop entirely new species appropri ate to the needs of your campaign, or you can leave the design of alien he roes to your players' imaginations.

What''s an Alien?
Each alien species possesses sever al abilities and limitations that dif ferentiate it from humanity. The first of these differences appears in the Ability Scores of each species. Due to differences in physiology and anato my, some alien characters can ex ceed human Ability maximums. For example, weren characters can reach a Strength of 16, while fraal heroes can possess Intelligence scores of 15. Both of these scores ex ceed the human maximum of 14.
Alien characters may suffer limi tations in other Ability maximums to compensate for this advantage. For example, weren are large and bulky, and can't have Dexterity scores high er than 12.
Since aliens have the same num ber of points to distribute as humans do, they must make sacrifices to reach extremely high scores in their natural Abilities. Alien characters exhibit superhuman ability in one or two areas, while humans have de cent scores in all Abilities. If you want to play a musclebound, gun toting scientist, you should create a human Tech Op with lots of combat skills if you want to create the best scientist possible, nothing beats a fraal or mechalus hero.
In addition to their higher Ability Score maximums, most alien charac ters receive some significant advan tages or benefits that human characters can't get: Fraal begin with psionic powers weren can in flict mortal damage in unarmed com bat t'sa are naturally armored. To compensate for these innate advan tages, aliens have fewer skill points with which to select broad and spe cialty skills than humans of compa rable intelligence. This reinforces the human advantage--humans are generalists who tend to pick up lots of skills.
Finally, each species possesses its own innate skills. For instance, se sheyans begin play with the Acro batics broad skill. You can allow players to change these free broad skills, or trade them in for other broad skills, but ask the player to provide a good explanation for why his hero doesn't fit the mold of his species. Put simply, why isn't this hero representative of his or her species?

1» Concept

ty Scores, advantages, disadvantages, and motivations.

The creation of new alien heroes provides players with a greater variety of choices from which to build their

Form and physiology may also afect the other categories such as hi tory, culture, and psychology later

own characters. New species also add layers of detail to your campaign and offer the potential for new storylines. Though not a complex un-

during the alien's design. For example, a species with telepathic communication might not develop a
culture based around the written

dertaking, species generation re-

word.

quires imagination and a good deal

of common sense.

When designing a new hero

3 » History

species, it's best to begin with a general concept before moving to the alien's Ability Scores, powers, and other game particulars.
From time to time, a player might

This category deals with the past events and important experiences that helped to shape an alien's character, the alien's inter- and intraspecies relationships, and its stellar

approach you about trying out a
brand-new species. There's no reason you can't allow any kind of alien you like into your campaign. However, you should keep an eye on game balance and character power

location or planet of origin.
Past events and historical experiences offer intriguing possibilities for an alien's development. Revolutions, natural disasters, invasions,
scientific breakthroughs, "alien"

when introducing a new hero species. If every player in your game decides that he wants to try creating ahero of the new species, then that

contact, and religious wars are just a few of the possible experiences that could influence the formation of a new species. For example, a species

alien might possess too many advantages and too few weaknesses. Even the most altruistic player has a hard time passing up a clear game advantage for the sake of roleplaying alone.
Work with the player using the guidelines for alien creation detailed below.

that suffers cruelly at the hands of invaders might develop into an aggressive, warlike people, or they might evidence a large amount of cowardice or apathy in the face of aggressive behavior.
Another important aspect of a species' history is its relationship to others of its kind, as well as its rela-

tionship to other aliens. A state of

2» Form and
Physiology

constant civil war might cause a
species to develop a high degree of distrust, fear, or antipathy for other

This category concerns itself with the anatomical makeup of species. `What does the alien look like? Is it bumancid? Bipedal? Quadrupedal?

members of its species. On the other hand, a species that remains decidedly neutral throughout a systemwide war may gain the trust of all

Does it have arms, tentacles, claws, involved planets--thus paving the

or some other appendages? What is way for a species whose members

its diet? Can it talk, or does it have @ nonverbal method of communica: tion? These are important questions toanswer as you create the species.

are known for diplomacy, tact, and skills at mediation.
Details about a species' planet of origin,(or lack thereof) can provide

Anything that relates to the alien's you with a definite blueprint for your

anatomical nature falls in this
category.

alien. A planet known for its hostile environment and deadly flora and

Answering these questions may fauna may engender a species

seem daunting at first. But remem- whose strength and swiftness is only

ber, you don't need to have a xenobiologist's understanding of the

surpassed by its ability to adapt to
harsh conditions. Likewise, beings

alien's anatomical functions. Jot down some quick notes on those characteristics that define the new

xaised on a paradise planet might eschew violence and aggression in favor of more altruistic endeavors.

species. These general ideas will

Don't worry about creating the en-

have an impact on later aspects of its design--such as the alien's Abili-

tire history of an alien civilization. A tew simple ideas will give you enough background to create the

~
B
OHIH
HOILBIHD
type of alien you envision. Other historical events and campaign storylines may form later as your heroes develop and interact with supporting cast members of the new species. 4 > Culture Culture includes a species' social institutions, governmental structures, and artistic movements, as well as its customs, mores, religious beliefs,
and laws. What type of class structure exists within this species' soci-
ety? What type of governmental system does it use? Do members of this species have any important or interesting taboos? What about artistic expression? These are just
some of the useful questions that can
assist you during this section of the design process.
A species' cullure heavily influences, and is influenced by, its histo1y. In addition, cultural preferences may steer heroes of this new species into certain professions, or forbid he-
roes to undertake certain careers.
For example, members of species with highly developed religious be-
& liefs in pacifism might never choose
the Combat Spec profession.

Form and Physiology

Psychology

History

Playability
Ability Scores

Weakness Skills

Culture

Advantage

She's armed, and it's dangerous

5» Psychology Psychology deals with the world-

with other heroes or supporting cast members, players will probably ex perience frustration and boredom

view and ultimate mindset of a

Atter all, playing a barely animate

species. Psychology influences how the species perceives the world

pile of goo is only fun for so long There's only one hard and fast rule

around it, and how it processes that governing the playability of new

perception. Psychological tendencies can influence and be influenced by

aliens: They must possess some degree of Intelligence. Unintelligent

the development of a species' culture aliens can't function as heroes.

and history. In addition, an alien's

Despite its form or physiology, a

form, how it interacts with the surtounding universe, provides a strong basis for its psychological outlook Anlien's worldview can affect its motivations, moral attributes, and, less obviously, its advantages and disadvantages.

new hero species must have some characteristies that make it compatible with humanity. It must possess the abilily to move independently and the fortitude to survive in environments that humanity can tolerate. lts body must include limbs, tenta-

Ability Scores. What minimums or maximums should you set?
Keep in mind that the normal range of Ability Scores for human heroes falls between 4 and 14, and use the following guidelines. Aliens with Abilities inferior to humans might have minimums as low as 2. On the other hand. aliens significantly superior to humans in a particular Ability may have maximums as high as 16. In addition, species in which the best members will never match the best humans may have an Ability maximum set at 10 or 12. Similarly, if the least member of the new species possesses greater scores than the least humans, the aliens'

cles, or other manipulative organs minimum scores might be 6 or 8.

6> Playability After you've fleshed out some generalideas about the new species, you should take a close look at its playability. How interesting, or possible, is

that can take the place of hands that humans are accustomed to. It shouldn't possess any innate powers that make it superior to any conceivable human character.

For example, fraal are intellectual creatures that can't match the physical capabilities of well-trained humans. Here are the Ability Score minimums and maximums for a fraal hero

itlora player to run a hero of this species? An alien made up entirely of aviscous liquid held together by mental powers might seem like an
intriguing possibility. However, if
this alien can't interact with its envi-
Tonment or communicate in any way

7 » Ability Score
Requirements
When a player creates a character belonging to @ new species, lhe first thing to do is generate the alien's

» Strength 4/11: The weakest fraal

heroes aren't any weaker than the

weakest humans, but fraal can't

match the muscular and physical de-

velopment of a human in good shape.

A

> Dexterity 4/11: Again, the least

TM)

agile fraal aren't any worse than the least agile humans, but they can't

match the grace or reaction speed of

`many human characters.

» Constitution 4/10: The same is
true for staming, resistance to dam-

age, and overall health. Even the

CREATION toughest fraal only makes it slightly above the human average. » Intelligence 9/15: There's no

such thing as an inferior mind among the fraal. Some fraal can

even exceed human capabilities,
HERD
while even the dimmest fraal match-

es the human average. » Will 9/16: Intuition, resolve, and

understanding are the defining char-

acteristics of the fraal race. The

weakest-willed fraal equals the av-

erage human, and many fraal possess significantly stronger wills than

`humans.

» Personality 4/15: The most per-

sonable and charismatic fraal are slightly better than humans. Other-

wise the fraal have a normal variation that parallels the human range

of Personlity.

9> Advantages

PROFESSIONS

AND CAREERS While the special advantages pos-
sessed by an alien are the most in-

teresting parl of designing a new

A hero's profession serves one major

species, they're also the trickiest to
design. Godlike innate gifts that

purpose: definition. Choosing a particular profession brings a hero into

allow a hero to emerge victorious easily spoil the excitement of the
game. Gamemasters must guard

focus and identifies his or her role in the campaign. At the same time, the choice of a profession doesn't neces-

against designing overpowered spe- sarily restrict a hero to certain capacial abilities or allowing such abili- bilities or powers. Anyone can

ties into their campaign.
Here are some examples of spe-

become an outstanding warrior or brilliant scientist--but heroes who

cial advantages appropriate t6 an
alien hero:

aren't Combat Specs or Tech Ops will find that it's not as easy. By

defining a hero's natural talents, a

» Action check bonus (t'sa) » All-around vision > Armor (t'sa) > Camoutlage (weren)

profession determines what kinds of adventures, challenges, and encounters best suit the heroes in your game.

» Environmental capability; toler- If o hero's profession is a broad

ates Class 2 or Class 3 environments.definition of what he does, his career

without aid

represents a more specific definition

»> Flight (sesheyan)

of who he is. The career that a hero

» Mental powers (fraal) » Natural resistance to temperature extremes, radiation, particular energy forms, poison, or disease

selects speaks volumes about his background, his methods and motives, his wealth and equipment, and his approach to an adventure. There

Any new alien heroes that you or your players create should stand on equal footing with the other characters in the campaign. Give the new

» Natural weaponry (weren)
» Poison > Regeneration; quickly recovers from wounds or from mortal damage

are few rules concerning careers; a hero designed without reference to any career is every bit as capable as a hero built on a career blueprint.

alien species a total of number of points to distribute among their Ability Scores equal to those given to other heroes. In the typical campaign, this total is 60 points.
8> Innate Skills

without surgery or treatment
Ą Increased resistance modifier to one Ability Score
> Skill bonus (mechalus, t'sa)
» Sprinting/pouncing
> Swimming/water breathing » Toughness (weren) » Unusual sense (sesheyan)

However, a career does help a player to envision his hero more clearly and understand how that hero will approach an adventure.
Heroes in Society

The finishing touch for an alien is the array of free broad skills that de-

Another good source for special ad-

scribe its natural talents. What skills vantages is your favorite science fic-

should every hero of that species possess? The answer depends upon

tion or fantasy novel, or a published compendium of alien species.

your conception of the new species.

f you want to create an alien without physical form, a species com-

10 > Weaknesses

posed entirely of mental energy, then you would most likely assign Intelli-

Balance powerful advantages by assigning unusual weaknesses, such

gence-based skills. Likewise,

as these:

super-strong species might receive

only Strength- and Dexterity-based skills. Remember to assign free

» Low Ability Scores » Sutfers increased damage from

broad skills with an eye toward

low impact, high impact, or energy

game balance. For example, it's un- attacks

likely that a species would develop » Reduced senses (sesheyan)

only the most expensive broad skills. See Chapter 2 in the Player's
Handbook for examples of free broad skills for aliens.

» Action check penalty » Skill penalty » Automatic flaw (weren) » Can't use certain types of equip-

ment--armor, for example--due to

i)

body form, cultural taboo, or any
other reason you can imagine

Heroes are uncommon, but they're not unique. Many of the most important allies, employees, villains, and
supporting characters that heroes in-
teract with possess a profession and
experience level. Since player-run heroes are at the center of action in your campaign, above-average supporting cast members naturally gravitate toward situations in which they help or hinder the heroes.
People with unusual ability, talent, or drive naturally rise to the upper levels--or the critical positions--of their vocation. In a 50-person police department, four or five of the highest ranking officers and administrators are Diplomats. Another two or three individuals might be Tech Ops: forensics specialists and criminologists. The department's four or five best fighters might be Com-
bat Specs, grouped into a tactical
unit. Finally, two or three of the se-

nior detectives and investigators would work s Free Agents. The ma-
jority of the department's personnel
are nonprofessionals with skills in
Law, Security, Investigation, Interaction, and other areas.
Heroes aren't always the people in charge, even if they are more competent than their superiors. In lact, player heroes shouldn't expect people to defer to them just because
they've got a pisto! 7 skill and the
ruthlessness to use it. Positional authority counts for a lot, and from time totime you might have to remind the players that their heroes must abide. by the rules (both written and un-
`written) of human society. A tough
police detective who ignores the po-
litically appointed commissioner
quickly finds himself suspended or
out of a job--even though the detec-
tive is alevel 5 Free Agent, while the
commissioner is a bumbling idiot `without any skills,
Here are some guidelines for the roles that heroes play in society:
Combat Specs
While a special forces unit such as.
the Green Berets or the Navy Seals `might contain all Combat Specs, `most armed forces include only & handful of these heroes. Naturally, Combat Specs appear more often in sacieties where warfare, unrest, or
lawlessness ensure that violence is
never too far away. Pacifistic or complacent societies produce very few individuals who study these skills.
Combat Specs may serve in the military (most as middle- or seniorranking enlisted men and some as officers), in police forces (as tactical specialists), or as thugs or enforcers
in criminal organizations. Generally, Combat Specs don't lead troops; senior officers are usually Diplomats
who choose Combat Spec as their
secondary profession.

Free Agents
In many societies, the Free Agent is not in great demand. The skills a Free Agent normally acquires are often concealed from the public at large: most Free Agents live on the edge of the law. Most of them thrive on anonymity and consciously cultivate an ability to fade into the background.
More than any other hero type, Free Agents prefer to operate alone or as members of small groups; they don't function well in a large, organized force. Even though a government or megacorporation may employ Free Agents, these heroes work best when given the freedom to use their wits, instinct, and special talents as they see fil.
Tech Ops
This profession embraces two relat-
ed character types: the tech user, such as a pilot or a hacker, and the
tech maker, an engineer or a theoretical scientist. People who work with technology are common in modern or advanced societies.
With time, patience, and exceptional performance, a Tech Op can rise 1o the highest technical or administrative level of his field. A
skilled hacker may become a vice
president of computer operations, while a sharp scientist could eventually become a department head or an outpost administrator.
Diplomats Businessmen, military officers, corporate executives, explorers, administrators, ambassadors, entertainers, journalists ... all of these prominent careers fall into the diplomatic sphere.
Diplomats have an inherent advantage in most social situations (because of their high Intelligence
and Personality scores). A trader
hero finds that local businessmen want to deal with him; the special
skills and talents of entertainers are
always in demand; military officers and government administrators have the potential to wield significant power. Its conceivable for an intelligent Combat Spec to rise to com-
mand of a ship, or a division of
ground troops, but a theater com`mander or service chief will almost always be a Diplomat with a military specialty.
Diplomats determine what needs

~- doing, formulate a plan of action,
and oversee its execution. They manage the human resources--Tech Ops, Free Agents, Combat Specs, or other B
Diplomats--necessary to complete
the task. Diplomats are natural leaders and organizers. A Diplomat is at his best when surrounded by other OU3H talented people who understand the
situation.

Mindwalkers

Your campaign may or may not fea-

ture these mental specialists. Refer

to Chapter 16: Optional Rules for

HOILBIHD

help in making the decision whether

to include psionics.

Using Careers
The sample careers presented in Chapter 6 in the Player's Handbook include a variety of selections to cover the most famous, popular, or exciting types of characters found in science fiction. However, the list isn'l exhaustive, nor are they hard-andfast rules. You may find that a partic-
ular hero or hero type isn't found in
the selection of careers available to your players' heroes. And you may
desire to create careers specific to
your campaign. Feel free to alter existing sample careers or design new ones.
Sample careers don't offer advantages in hero creation. A player who starts from scratch can easily build a very capable hero without using any of the samples. The best role for sample careers in your campaign is a purely descriptive one. They pro-
vide a beginning, listing general mo-
tivations and skills, as well as overall function in your campaign.

SKILL
SELECTION
Skills are the heart of the game. The most important differences between one hero and another lie in their selection of skills. This s the longest and most involved part of creating a hero. You should look over a player's hero when he or she finishes selecting skills and make yourself available to answer questions and offer guidance.
Depending on the setting of your game, heroes may not have all the skills listed in the Player's Handbook
& open to them. There's no point in
selecting the Armor Operation-pow-

~
B
CRERTION
HERD
ered armor skill in a modern technothriller or espionage campaign; none of the armor types available requires this skill. Likewise, the Vehicle Oper-
ation-water vehicle specialty skill is out of place in a campaign set on @
desert planet.
Profession Bias
One of the rewards for choosing a profession is the ability to select skills of the profession's group at reduced cost. When a character selects askill inside his profession, the base costis | point lower. While players are free to pay the full cost and buy any skill, they'll end up with more skills and higher ranks in specialty skills if they stay within their heroes'
professional strong points.
For example, many of the combatoriented skills fall into the Combat Spec skill group, so they're less expensive for @ Combat Spec than they are for any other character. The Combat Spec can improve his weapon skills more quickly than a Free Agent, Diplomat, or Tech Op can.
Having to pay | point more than another profession does isn't really a deterrent to a determined player. You should encourage players to build any type of hero they wish--as long as these heroes it into your particu-
lar campaign setting, and their play-
ers are honest in observing the limitations of Intelligence, profession, and level when purchasing skills. Some of the best characters include a smattering of skills that
aren't tied directly to their standard
1ole in the game. For example, a space marine with some Deception skills makes a great barracks con
3 artist.

Generalizing Skills
1f you want to make a skill more accessible in your campaign. feel free to change its availability. For example, a campaign centered on starfighters or heavy-armor combat `might discourage players from creating Diplomats or Free Agent charac-
ters. But if you change Vehicle
Operation-space vehicle and Armor Operation--powered armor to Open skills, any hero can purchase them
at the base cost.
Style Skills
A few skills are open-ended, allowing players to customize their char-
acters to suit a particular style or
image. A couple of examples are the Knowledge and Acrobatics skills. If a player wants his character to be proficient in skateboarding, he's welcome to invent a new specialty skill under Acrobatics called skateboarding. "Style" skills such as this one
can provide opportunities for role-
playing and make a character truly memorable.
PERKS & FLAaws
Perks and flaws aren't intended to be game-breaking faults or strengths. Rather, they function as colorful
characteristics that finish a hero in
just the right way. Perks and flaws don't have to bal-
ance precisely. lf a hero has skill points left over aiter skill selection, he can pick up a perk without having to take a flaw to get extra points. Similarly, a hero might overbuy on his skills and compensate with
flaw or two. As long as the points
add up and the hero doesn't harm your campaign, it's okay.
AFlraewn'st TFhlaatws
Some flaws clearly have more of an immediate game impact than others. A Powertul Enemy may not bother a hero for months at a time, but the Fragile flaw could crop up in any combat scene. Make sure that you record any flaws players select for their characters, and make use of them! If a hero's Powerful Enemy never makes an appearance, then the character's flaw, a supposed dis-

advantage, merely represents free skill points that work to the hero's advantage. Finding just the right use for a flaw in an adventure can heighten the dramatic tension just as much as throwing surprise attacks or deadly traps at the heroes.
ROLEPLAYING ATTRIBUTES
Once a player builds the physical skeleton of his hero, it's time for him 1o think of that character's personali-
ty. Motivation, moral attitude, and
character traits are powerful tools for developing well-rounded characters, They give you a useful handle on what's important to the heroes in your campaign, and help you design adventures that they will want to undertake and complete.
More information on roleplaying attributes can be found in Chapter 7:
Attributes.
EQUIPMENT
The last step in preparing a charac-
ter is equipping him with weapons,
armor, and nity technological devices.
`There are four good ways to handle the initial allocation of equipment when a hero is created. First,
you can use the guidelines present-
ed in Chapter 6: Sample Careers in the Player's Handbook to provide he10es with signature gear. Second, you can personally select the weapons, armor, and gear that you think the hero should carry. Third, you can allow the player to peruse the equipment lists in the Player's Handbook and choose the items he thinks his hero should have. Review his choices and see if he went over the top or sold himself short. Finally, you can simply allow the hero to begin with starting funds and purchase anything that he can atford. This places ahard ceiling on the number of neat gadgets and high-powered weapons with which @ hero can begin play.
i you decide to assign equipment, remember that heroes begin with some pocket cash (see TasLz P30: MonEY ON HAND on page 129 in the Player's Handbook). It's not much, but itallows a hero to pay for a few meals, lodging, or small equipment purchases until he eamns money from somewhere else.

Progress Level
Before you start allocating equipment to the heroes, you must decide what Progress Level your campaign
is set at. See Chapter 13: Campaign
Design and Chapter 14: Campaign Auchitecture for guidelines. TypicalIy, amodern game is PL 5, a near-future game is PL 6, and a far-future game is PL 7 or PL 8. However, some areas in any setting may be ata lower Progress Level than other areas. For example, there may be areas that rely on PL 6 technology in aPL7 setling. You could even rule
that a hero from a barbaric or rustic
world must begin play with arms and equipment of Progress Level 3 or
lower, although the hero could quick-
Iy upgrade his technology by shopPing in an advanced location.
Weapon and

most suitable character has a ship at his disposal. Maybe the hero scraped together the money for a
down payment, but still has to pay it
oft. Of course, this opens the ques-
tion of what bank, financial institu-
tion, or underworld syndicate holds
the loan. Let your generosity to a
hero expand your own campaign.
What Every Hero Owns
Even if a hero buys nothing else, it's assumed that he begins play with
two or three changes of street
clothes, shoes, a wallet, a cheap wristwatch, basic jewelry, a toiletry kit, and maybe a suitcase, bag, or
trunk to carry all of it in. Beyond this,
a hero s free to purchase anything that's available and within his means.

Armor Availability

ADVANCED

HEROES Grenades are cheap and useful in a

fight, but there's no way each hero in Many Gamemasters and players

the party should be toting a half-

prefer to begin a campaign with

dozen incendiary grenades everywhere they go. The availability 1atings for weapons and top-of-theline armor on the equipment tables

tough, experienced heroes. Some-
times this is necessary to ensure that
the heroes have a decent chance of survival and a fair assortment of

are there to preserve a sense of real- powers and abilities at their com-

ism. Many types of weapons and

mand. Usually, even beginning he-

amor are illegal in civilized locales. Toes possess a reasonable battery of

It's reasonable for heroes to wear

skills.

sidearms in rough-and-tumble re-

1i you need to create an advanced

gions, but rifles, heavy weapons,

character, here's how you can doit.

and explosives aren't acceptable in

Have the players build their charac-

many places.When the heroes step

ters normally, but when theyre ready

offtheir ship into a starport, city, or

to assign skills to their heroes, the

space station, they should leave

their plasma
behind.

guns

and

mass

rifles

extra experience gives the new hero more skill points to work with than a beginning hero normally receives.

HEROES, See TABLE G4: ADVANCED

SVieghnicalteusreanIdtems

Heroes buying skills at a rank higher than 1 can refer to TABLE GS5: RANKS. BUYING SKILLS AT HIGH

Nomatter how much money a new

It the skill is in the character's pro-

hero begins play with, there are a

fession group, subtract 1 skill point

fow things he just can't afford. Even per rank purchased.

aFilthy Rich character can't afford

For example, you're creating an

most starships. You may decide to let expert Free Agent. li you decide he

aherostart with a high-priced piece should have rank 6 in the pisto! spe-

olgearlike this, despite the fact that cialty, it costs him 6 times the pistol

the hero can't even think of buying it cost (4 points) plus 15 skill points, for

outof his own funds.

atotal of 39 points ([6x41+15=39). A

The best reason for such generosi- Combat Spec character purchasing

tyis story-related:; if you have an

the same skill would pay 33 skill

easier time creating adventures for a points (39-6=33).

group of heroes with their own ship,

you can arbitrarily decree that the

~
B
KK

is the hero's

HOILG3L)

vement level.

7ts is the number of

bonus skill points a hero

of a certain level re-

ceives in addition to the

hormal total indicated by

his Intelligence score.

ank is the highest

rank that can be as-

signed to any of the

hera's specialty skills.

Last Words
Remember, players are never your adversaries, nor are they your tools or puppets. Keeping watch over your players' heroic characters as they grow and change is one of your most important tasks in any roleplaying game. You should take pleasure in seeing your heroes' accomplishments s your campaign grows. Their heroes give dialogue and ex-
pression to the stories you create.

list price @ x list) +1 @3 x list) +3 (4 X list) +6 (5 x list) +10 (6 X list) +15 7 x list) +21
list) +55 a2 x list) +66

Resolving events during a roleplaying
session follows a simple process: You
present a situation, your players think of a response or a course of action, and then you and your players determine if their plan worked, usually by rolling dice.
This chapter discusses the most
commonly used rules of the game. Here, you'll find ways to resolve actions.
combat, and hazards.

o
[>

SEEISHIALNG

1] 3

The Core
Mechanic
The core mechanic relies on skill checks and feat checks. These are d20 rolls compared to the character's relevant score. If a player rolls equal to or lower than his hero's skill score or Ability Score, he succeeds. If he rolls higher than the score, he fails.
Since some tasks are harder than
others, the d20 (the control die) is rolled with a second situation die that is added to or subtracted from the d20 result. For easy tasks, the sit
uation die is subtracted from the d20,
making it more likely that the com bined roll will generate a low num ber and result in success. For difficult tasks, the situation die is added to the d20.

Control Die + Difficulty

Average

Situation Die Level

Roll

d20+3d20

Nearly Impossible 42

mo!

success, howevor d20+2d20

Gargantuan

315

d20+d20

Grueling

21

d20+d12

Formidable

d20+d8

Challenging

d20+d6

Hard

d20+d4

Tough

d20+d0 d20d4

Average Easy

d20d6

Very Easy

d20d8

Extremely Easy

d20d12

Cakewalk

d20d20

No Sweat

The average roll shows the medi an result of each particular combina
tion of dice. I you consider that a talented hero has a skill score of 14 to 18, you can get a good idea of the odds of success.

-- You can use the core mechanic in one of two distinct ways. You con eyeball it or figure the odds.

Figure the Odds
The other method is « little more pre-
cise. Instead of arbitrarily assigning

P

adifficulty level, the Gamemaster

Eyeballing

applies individual step modifiers,

Now that you know the core mechan- considering each condition that ap-

ic. you're done learning the ALTERNIpTliYes. It's not as fluid or off the cuff as

game. It's that simple. Whenever a

the first method, but it's a little more

ACTION player attempts a task, assign a situ- accurate and realistic. In time, this

ation die that seems appropriate to method can be almost as fast.

IN

the situation. Use the definitions of

Start with a base situation die. A

each difficulty level as a guideline. feat check, an untrained skill check,

For example, a Grueling action has « and a broad skill check have a +d4

+d20 situation die, an Average action base situation die. A specialty skill

has a +d0, and a Cakewalk has

check uses a +d0 base situation die.

-dlz.

The base situation die is just that:

Here's an example using this fast abase. From this starting point,

and loose method for assigning situ-
ation dice in a game situation. The hero, Sergeant Raterman, has found firefight. GAMEMASTERS
himself suddenly in a

you'll count bonuses or penalties to reflect the exact situation. Specific actions and situations may impose, for example, a +1, +2, or +3 step

Player: "Raterman kneels behind the oil drum and squeezes off a couple of rounds with his rail pistol. What do [ roll?"
Gamemaster: "Lets see the ... thug is about 20 meters away, and he's hiding behind a concrete support column. Looks like a Hard shot. Roll your d20 control die and add a d6 situation die."

penalty. Others may apply a-1,-2, or 3 step bonus. Bonuses and penal-
ties larger than this are rare.
Firing a pistol at short range gives a-1bonus, s the hero's roll goes
from d20+d0 (Average) to d20-d4
(Easy). The target's resistance modifier may make the shot tougher; if the hero's shooting at a villain with +2 resistance modifier, now the play-
er must roll the d20 and add d4. The

`The Gamemaster didn't take any-
thing into account other than gut in-
stinct about how hard the task should be. If the thug was standing out in the open, looking the other way, the Gamemaster might have

Gamemaster can take into account any additional modifiers he wishes. The room is pitch black? Add anoth-
. er +3 steps. The hero's a firing an accurate laser pistol? Take a -1 bonus.
Here's an example:

called it a Very Easy shot and assigned a -d6 bonus instead.
`There's nothing more to the eyeballing method. It allows for a fastmoving style of play that focuses on roleplaying instead of roll-playing.

Player: "Raterman kneels behind the oil drum and squeezes off a couple of rounds with his pistol. What dice do1roll?"
Gamemaster: "The thug s at medium range, so that's a +1 penalty, and he's using a concrete column for

cover, for a +2 penalty. Call it a +3

penalty altogether. Your base situa-

tion die is +d0, so you're rolling a d20+d8."

Most Gamemasters use a combination of figuring the odds and eyeballing. In scenes involving combat,
precision is more important. In other
scenes, especially during intense roleplaying, game mechanics can be minimized by a Gamemaster who eyeballs the situation and moves on.
Extreme Difficulty
Heroes naturally try to do things that dety the laws of probability. On occasion, a hero's skill check or feat check picks up so many penalty

steps that it goes beyond the level of d20+d20. For example, a hero might have a base situation die of +d4 on a broad skill, and the conditions might add o +6 penalty to this roll.
For each step the hero goes past Grueling (d20+d20), add another d20 situation die. If your players routinely attempt nearly impossible feats on the off chance that they'll get lucky, consider applying some special consequences for a Failure result. Sure, the hero might take down the villain with a called shot to the head, but i he misses, it's likely that the hero will take out a hostage.
Extreme Ease
At the other end of the spectrum, sometimes heroes find themselves in
extremely favorable situations. A
hero might be a skilled engineer, attempting to fix a minor problem with
lots of technical assistance; his roll
could easily go to -5 steps (or better) depending on his exact situation. When a situation die bonus becomes
greater than -d20, don't roll the dice.
Simply rule that the hero succeeds. `There's one clear exception to this
rule. You should roll the dice when the exact degree of success--Amaz-
ing, Good, or Ordinary--might make
a difference. Attack rolls and similar
combat actions are an example. In such a case, the situation die never gets better than ~d20.
Resistance Madifiers
When a character attempts an action
that affects another hero, a standard
`modifier applies: the resistance mod-
ifier. This number represents innate resistance to a speciic form of attack. Resistance modifiers are based
on Ability Scores. Different skills use different resistance modifiers, as
shown on the table on the next page.

Degrees

of

Success

The degree of success on a skill check or feat check is almost as im`Pportant as whether the check is simply a success or a failure. When ahero rolls equal to or less than his or her skill score, an Ordinary success is assured. If the roll is equal to or less than one-half the hero's skill score (rounded down), its a Good success. If the roll is equal to or less than one-quarter of the hero's skill
score, it's an Amazing success.

........... e

ntelligence or Will

Dexterity

it

eseucane=a WI

Melee Weapaons .

....Strength

Modern Ranged Weapons..............Dexterity

Primitive Ranged Weapons .

Psionic Skills .......ccccu.....

Stealth
Street Smart Unarmed Attack

ntelligence
Strength

or Will

» A power spike damages a com

puter file the heroes are working with.

P

The mishap should be connected with the task the hero was attempt ing. The Critical Failure shouldn't

necessarily cause damage to any

character, but it could result in the possibility of damage--if the hero was hanging on a rope that sudden ly breaks, he should get a Dexterity

feat check or Athletics--climb skill

check to catch himself before he falls SHILSHWING

into the rocky gorge. If a hero's errant shot endangers a comrade, you may HI

allow the unintended target a Dex

terity feat check to dodge the attack.

Marginal Success
In many game situations, a hero doesn't have a chance to fail out right. When this is the case, a Mar ginal success is possible. See the skill descriptions in Chapter 4: Skills.
When do Marginal successes come into play? They shouldn't be used in combat scenes or important challenge scenes. Even using a non combative skill such as Computer Science becomes difficult for a hero when bullets are flying.
Marginal successes shouldn't be used for resolving an allornothing situation such as jumping a chasm. There''s no chance of anything other than failure or success.
Automatic Success
Aroll of 1 on the control die is a suc cess, regardless of what comes up on the situation die. The result of the situation die is taken into account only for the purpose of determining degree of success. At a minimum, the roll of 1 on the control die indicates an Ordinary success is achieved.
You have the option to nullity the possibility of an automatic success. You should reserve this option for special situations, and warn the player whose hero is attempting the action beforehand. Maybe the task is incredibly difficult and important to the flow of the story. You may not want to allow an untrained character to simply get lucky.
Critical Failure
Aroll of 20 on the control die indi cates a Critical Failure or some form of bad luck. Even if the result of the skill check or feat check with a situa

tion die turns out to be a success, the roll fails automatically. Heroes with apparently infallible skill scores can still fail through that 1in20 chance of a Critical Failure.
When a Critical Failure occurs, it's appropriate for you to apply a story result that indicates a disastrous event has occurred. Some skills list specific consequences of Critical Failures, but most of the time it's up to you to decide what happens. Here are some complications that could
arise:
» A tool breaks or malfunctions. » A vehicle suifers a breakdown. » A delicate interaction is de railed--a bribery attempt might be interrupted by the arrival of a superi or officer or @ scam might be broken up by an honest bystander. » A gun jams or misfires. » An ally or bystander is jeopar dized by weapons fire. » Bad weather makes a routine journey or trek unusually hazardous. » A piece of delicate or important equipment in the scene is ruined by a hero's stray weapons fire.

Performing

NOILIY

Actions

The use of a control die, a situation die, and degrees of success is the
system used for resolving any action
in the game. Later in this book, skill checks and feat checks are dis cussed more fully, but here's an intro duction.

Skill Checks
Skills represent knowledge, experi ence, and aptitude involving specific tasks. When a hero attempts an ac
tion, a skill check is the usual meth
od of resolution. Each skill is tied to an Ability
Score: Strength, Dexterity, Constitu tion, Intelligence, Will, or Personali
ty. This score is the number used for a broad skill check, and each rank purchased in a specialty skill adds to the score. If a character attempts to use a skill he doesn't possess, he uses his untrained score (onehalf of
the related Ability Score, rounded
down). For more information on skills and
their use, see Chapter 4: Skills.

20 on control die Higher than skill score

Critical Failure
Failure/Marginal Ordinary Good
AAmuaztiongmatic Success

< Complex Skill Checks A single roll determines success at

Perks and Flaws Sometimes it's necessary o test the

priate skill scores--and don't forget the opponent's resistance modifier.

most tasks. When trying to jump

effectiveness of the special power or Then compare the degree of success

p across a chasm, shoot a gun, or no- weakness that perks and flaws rep- each achieves--Ordinary, Good, or

tice a hidden ambusher, success or failure is immediately apparent.

resent. In play. perk and flaw checks Amazing. The hero with the better act as special kinds of feat checks. degree of success wins the contest.

Other tasks that are more compli- Each perk and flaw is tied to a spe-

I both characters score the same

cated or time-consuming demand a

cific Ability Score. For more informa- degree of success, the issue isn't re-

ACTION complex skill check. Some skills au- tion on perks and flaws, see Chapter solved yet--they're locked in a

tomatically use complex resolution. 5: Perks & Flaws.

struggle, or they've failed to sway

IH

You can also use complex skill checks to build suspense and ten-

Character vs.

the object of their attentions. The contest continues next round as the

sion, even in circumstances that nor-

Character

heroes try again.

mally use single checks. For

Most actions are resolved by a single To build suspense and tension,

guidelines on the use of complex skill checks, see Chapter 4: Skills.

roll made by the player of the'acting you can resolve competitive characcharacter; opposition on the part of « ter actions with simultaneous com-

Feat Checks

second character, if any, is reflected plex skill checks. For this method, by a resistance modifier applied to allow a number of successes to accu-

Sometimes no skill is applicable or a the acting character's roll.

mulate through individual rolls as

task involves a measure of raw abili-
GAMEMASTERS

Occasionally more than one char- with a normal complex skill check,

ty, not a specific skill. In these cases, acter appears to be active--such as and when a certain number of suc-

instead of calling for a skill check,

during an arm-wrestling match or

cesses is achieved, a character is de-

you should call for a feat check.

when two heroes try to interact with clared victorious.

Guidelines for the use of feat checks appear in Chapter 4: Skills.

the same person. If you feel that both parties involved are entitled to a roll,

Assisting Actions

allow both to roll using their appro- Heroes and villains alike can benefit

from abit of help from time to time.

Make the Results Memorable

Working together to accomplish a task is one of the best ways to in-

crease the chance of success. Every

additional character involved be-

yond the first one adds a modifier to

the attempt. The benefits of coopera-

tion are described in "Assisting Ac-

tions" in Chapter 3: Heroes in Action

in the Player's Handbook.

Apply limits to assisting actions
as you see fit. For a character to assist, the conditions have to be right For example, only so many characters can it behind a door in an at-
tempt to push it open.
Second, don't insult the intelligence of your villains and supporting cast by forcing them to always work alone while the heroes work together. A villain who leads dozens of followers should have the same sort

of cooperation working for him,

Two Actions at Once When heroes attempt to perform more than one action at a time, the standard rule is to apply a +2 step penalty to the first action and a +4 step penalty to the second action.
You can use your discretion, though, to adjust this general rule to fit the specific conditions during a game. Sometimes performing two actions shouldn't incur any pendlty. When a character leaps across a chasm, it's assumed that grabbing the ledge and holding on is simply past of the action. At other times, the

B

SHILSUMINGD NI

HOILDG

TiME

checks to see which of the characters involved in the scene gets the drop

Time is one of your best tools to maintain an illusion of reality. Many plots and plot devices require time or feature imposing deadlines; by

on the others. The first step in sorting out a
scene is determining the order in which heroes, villains, and other

letting your heroes know how much or how little time they have at their disposal, you encourage the players to consider the situation from a real-

characters act. Every character involved, hero or villain, gets to take at least one action during the course of an action round. Depending on a

life perspective. Heroes won't back down if they know that a helicopter waits to pick them up whenever they're ready to leave. Once heroes know that their ride leaves in exactly one hour, their players will feel the pressure to move fast.

character's speed, luck, and situa-
tion, he may be able to take several actions during a round.
An action round is broken into four phases: Amazing, Good, Ordinary, and Marginal. Anything that occurs in the Amazing phase takes

place before events in the Good

Action Rounds

phase, Good phase events take place before Ordinary phase events,

When it's important to know who is

and Ordinary events happen before

doing what and when, scenes are broken into action rounds. The goal

Marginal events. The action check determines in

of these rules is not to present an ut- which of the four phases a character

secondary action shouldnt apply a

terly realistic simulation of heroes in can act. The degree of success that a

penalty because it's so easy. A hero

action--it's to give you a tool that

hero or villain achieves on his action

who shouts "Run away!" while

You can use to see how a scene tums check corresponds to the phase in

charging down a corridor or "Surren- out.

which the character can take his or

dex!" while firing at the enemy with

Not every scene needs action

her first action of the round. The

his rifle isn't really attempting a sec- rounds; if the heroes are questioning character can act in this phase, or

ond action. On the other hand, you might rule

a contact or trying to bribe their way past a gale guard, there's no need to

decide to wait until a later phase. A character can act in a number of

asecond action impossible in some keep track of events round by round phases equal to his actions per

circumstances, For example, a swim- When should you call for action round.

ming character can't use both hands checks and treat the scene as a tacti-

to operate a computer at the same

cal situation? The moment one char- Who Goes

St?

time.

acter involved in the scene starts to

When two characters act in the same

do something that someone else

phase, they're assumed to be acting

would vigorously oppose--such as run away, pull out a gun, or seta
bomb--you should call for action

simultaneously. So, the effects of any
i action--such as damage--aren't ap-
plied until the end of the phase.

<
B
ACTION IN
GAMEMASTERS

1fit's absolutely necessary to know who gets to act first in a phase, characters who haven't taken any actions in the round get to act before characters who have taken one or more actions. Characters who achieve the same degree of success act in the order of their action check scores, highest score first. Finally, a character who achieves a Critical Failure result on his action check takes his action last in the Marginal phase.
No Action Check? Every character involved in a fight is entitled to an action check each round. but at times a character might not be able to make a check. Unconscious characters don't make action checks, although they may be able to roll each round to try to wake up. Characters who are hopelessly trapped or restrained might not be allowed action checks. Finally, he10es who choose to use all-out movement forfeit the ability to make action checks until the round after they decide to stop.
38

No place to hide
Phases
Each action round lasts about 12 sec onds. Each of the four phases of the round takes up about 3 seconds Here's a short list of things that a hero could do in a single phase:
» Attempt an unarmed or melee attack.
»> Make a single-shot, burst, or
autofire attack with a ranged
weapon. » Throw a grenade or other
thrown weapon. » Attempt an athletic or acrobatic
feat (jump, climb, daredevil, etc.). » Use Stealth to set up a sneak at-
tack. » Use Security, Tactics, or Leader-
ship to improve the actions of other hexoes.
» Attempt to use any encounter skill that could reasonably be pulled off with a lew words of dialogue.
» Continue a complex skill check that allows skill checks each phase.
» Use a psionic power, mutation, or cybernetic enhancement.
» Draw or change weapons
» Open a door with caution, or
barge through recklessly and altack » Get into or out of a vehicle. » Find and ready an object or de-

Time in the game, like everything else, is imaginary. It's likely to take
you and your players five or ten min-
utes to resolve everything that happens in a single action round. When you play out a scene in a roleplaying game, you're watching everything in
slow motion.
me and Adventures
Keoping track of days, weeks, and months is easy. Here are a couple of measuring sticks for keeping track of time in fast-moving situations.
» Action rounds fit tactical situations such as combat or fast-moving challenges. There are five action rounds in a minute.
» Minutes are usetul for noncombat searches in small areas, chal lenges of moderate duration, and brief encounter scenes.
» Hours are appropriate for strate-
gic movement, long challenges, or lengthy negotiations.

TaBLE G7: DeTecTion VMIODIFIERS

E

Background

Light

Modifier

B

Tiny

Camouflaged

Total darkness +3 penalty

Small

Far

Obscured

Maoonlight

+1 penalty

Average

Medium

Indistinct

Twilight

none

Large

Close

Contrast

Daylight

bonus

Huge

Very close Clashing

Bright sun

-3 bonus

You will routinely switch time scales toreflect the conditions surrounding the heroes. A long overland march to aUFO crash site might take hours; searching the wrecked alien ship would be handled in minutes; and any challenge or combat scenes involving the alien creatures and their automated defenses are resolved
using action rounds.
Of course, time isn't always an important factor, and in such cases exact precision is not required. For example, you don't need to know whether 35 or 36 minutes have elapsed since the heroes entered the ruins. Keep track of time when it's important, and ignore it when it's not aconsideration in your story.
DETECTION
Its natural that your heroes will
react to threats they perceive in the
world around them. This section provides information to help you determine exactly what they see, hear, smell, and detect. A group of characters with an advantage in firepower might be picked off if they find them-
selves in a position where they can't
see an enemy who can see them just
fine,

The Awareness
Check

gories to reflect a hero's chance to

SHILSHHINGD

detect events or objects using other

senses. For example, a sound might I

The measuring stick for whether a

be described in terms of size (how

hero can see, hear, or spot something loud it is), distance, and how much it

is the awareness check. Awareness- stands out from the background

perception is the proper skill check noise that surrounds it.

when it's possible for a character to

NOILDY

Range of Vision notice something by sight or sound.
Awareness-intuition represents the

ability to sense danger when no signs are available to the five sens-

Humans are visual creatures, relying on eyesight as their primary source

es. Finally, if a hero undertakes a

of gathering information. Heroes

conscious and thorough search for a have a number of devices available

hidden creature or object, Investi- that can augment their vision, in-

gate-search is used instead of

cluding binoculars, imaging gog-

Awareness.

gles, and infrared goggles.

Many factors can modify a hero's

Most encounter scenes or combat

chance to spot something. How far

scenes begin when the heroes spot

away is the object? Wha time of day their potential adversaries. They

is it? What kind of ground cover is

may be within weapons range or

available? How big is the object or

may have to close the distance. As a

creature? How well camouilaged is

rough measure of the distance at

it? See TABLE G7: DETECTION MODIFIERwShi.ch someone or something might

Choose a condition from each col- be spotted, classify the prevailing

umn and add the modifiers together visibility and illumination as Amaz-

to produce the total modifier.

ing (full sunlight in open country),

® Example: Harris is trying to spot Good (a brightly lit room), Ordinary

an enemy sniper who just took a shot (an average day or moderately lit

at him. The sniper's prone (+1), at

1o0m), Marginal (a cloudy day).

very long range (+3), camouflaged by Slight (light rain or twilight), Moder-

his background (+3}--a total +7

ate (moonlight or fog), or Extreme

penalty (1+3+327) to Harris's check. (total darkness). TABLE G8: VisuaL De-

Its also midday (-3), so this is re-

at TECTION RANGES lists the distances

duced to a +4 penalty.

which a person, a vehicle, and a ter-

You can modify these broad cate- 1ain feature can be seen in certain

conditions of visibility.

The ranges on Table G8 are ap-

proximations. Use common sense to

Ordinary

Object Sighted

Person

Vehicle

2000 m 10000 m

1000 m 5000 m

500 m

2500 m

Terrain
100 km
50 km 25 km

take into account local conditions.
For example, the heroes might be standing only 500 meters from the ocean, but if there's a sand dune between them and the beach, they
won't see any water.

Marginal
Maderate Extreme

100 m
50 m
20 m
a2m

500 m
LG 50 m
5m

5 km
2 km 500 m 10m

Sound Like illumination, sound can be rated Marginal, Ordinary, Good, or
k! Amazing. Marginal noises are at the
volume of a whisper, and Awareness

--checks suffer a +2 penalty. Ordinary sound is equivalent to a conversation at normal volume; no penalty is

P

applied. Good sound includes screams, car backfires, and the like;

venture, use the strategic movement rules to build a rough time frame for the story, and then create plenty of events and obstacles for the heroes to battle through.

Awareness checks receive a -2

# Example: A group of heroes, led

bonus, Prolonged exposure is annoy- by the brave Sqt. Raterman, crashes

ing but not harmful. Amazing sounds 800 kilometers from civilization and are deatening, at or above 100 deci- has to walk out of the alien wilder-
ACTION

Critical

bels. Characters forced to endure

ness on foot. The overland movement

IN

prolonged exposure to Amazing

rules below indicate that the heroes

sound may need to make Stamina- will need 20 to 30 days to reach safe-

endurance skill checks to avoid stun ty. During this month, the heroes may

damage.

experience a full adventure among

impassable gorges, hostile dlien

no damage no damage
no damage

MOoOVEMENT

savages, and hungry predators. You

can make this journey into an epic

ered racing boat can only use a frac-

Your heroes are likely to travel quite tale of survival.

tion of its power in rough water or

alot; it's rare for villains and their the GAMEMASTERS minions to conveniently arrive at
heroes' headquarters to be arrested or disposed of. Villains often lurk in

The movement rules are intended to be atool for the Gamemaster, so that you can guess at how long it takes to get from Point A to Point B.

heavy seas, and a sports car might only be able to average 5 or 10 kph in a taffic jam.

the most remote, inaccessible, and hazardous reaches of the setling. Naturally, the heroes have to go after them in order to keep the story mov-
ing. It's your job to get them there.

They aren't an ironclad straitjacket. There is one general rule you can always apply instead: Make it up! You know it takes about an hour to drive 100 kilometers (about 60 miles) in your car, so if the heroes are using

Walking
Heroes can't{ly, drive, or sail to every place they need to go. Often, they must walk at least the last few kilo-
meters. Refer to "Traveling Long Distances" on page 56 in Chapter 3:

Strategic

low-tech ground transport to go from one city to the next, just say so--

Heroes in Action in the Players Handbook.

Movement

there's no need to plot their hourly

The speed of @ march determines

Surface Vehicles Strategic movement occurs during
an interlude in the story, when the heroes aren't doing much other than trying to cover distance. In the most wide-open starfaring adventures, the heroes might visit dozens of star systems in search of the villains' secret base or stronghold. Marching from Chicago to Cleveland through the radioactive wreckage of a bombedout America would also be strategic movement. Any time the story has to change locations--even getting to the other side of town--you'll need an interlude for strategic movement.
Strategic movement is not always safe and secure. Heroes marching across an untamed world on foot

positions on your world map. The most important consideration
in overland movement is the mode of
transportation available to the he-
roes. Crossing the Schara in a light plane is a lot easier than doing it on foot.
rcraft Aircraft available travel at several hundred kilometers per hour. Use the cruising speed for the specific vehicle (see Chapter 12: Vehicles in the Player's Handbook) as its average speed. Don't forget to consider the need for refueling when relevant.

how often a hero must make a Stamina-endurance skill check to avoid fatigue damage. Refer to TasLe G9: EXHAUSTION to see how many points of fatigue damage are suffered.
For characters with the Movement broad skill, the frequency of Stamina-endurance checks is reduced by 1 hour per category.
Pendlties caused by each point of fatigue damage apply to Staminaendurance checks.
A typical hero with the Movement
skill can maintain @ march for 10 to 12 hours before exhaustion sets in.
By the end of the march, the charac-
ter is stumbling with fatigue, but about 60 kilometers have been cov-

should have dozens of dangerous challenge, encounter, and combat scenes before they reach their destination. If the journey itself is an ad-

Land vehicles and watercrait travel
at speeds of up to 200 kph, but may not be able to move at maximum speed in rough terrain. A jet-pow-

ered. Recovery of fatigue damage is discussed in the "Durability" section, later in this chapter.
Some types of terrain are more for-

midable than others. Almost anyone

can walk 10 kilometers along a flat stretch of road, but wading through

10 kilometers of thick mud, tangled

vegetation, or chest-deep water is a much harder chore. A hero moving

through formidable terrain suffers a penalty on his Stamina-endurance

skill checks. The Movement-trail-

blazing skill can reduce or negate these pendlties.

Smooth terrain is flat--plains,

scrubland, or rocky desert. Trails and

minor roads fall into this category.
No penalty applies to Stamina--en-
durance skill checks.

Kilometers per Hour

B

Varied terrain includes sand, hills, light forest, or difficult trails. A +2

Quality

Stroll

March

Forced March

penalty is applied to Stamina-en-

Marginal (CON 10)

6

8

durance skill checks. Rugged terrain includes thick jun-
gle, swamp, marsh, deep snow, or mountains. A +3 penalty is applied

Ordinary (CON 12}
Good [CON 14) Amazing (CON 16)

6

10

B8

12

10

14

to Stamina-endurance skill checks.

Darkness, inclement weather, and

Stroll: The hero rides at a walking pace for his

SHILSHHIWGD

icy or slippery terrain can further complicate overland travel. Each of these or similar conditions adds an additional +1 penalty.

mount, and dismounts to lead it frequently. March: The hero es at a walking pace but may
trot or canter for short periods. He dismounts and

HI

leads his mount occasionally.

Mounted Travel

Forced March: The hero presses his mount hard,

HOILDY

Mounts offer three major advan-

taking long canters and dismounting to lead his

tages: They're {aster than moving on

mount only when the animal is desperate for rest.

foot, they carry more gear, and they

save their riders from the fatigue

they would suffer if walking. Ignore especially slow mounts such as oxen, yaks, elephants, or burros;

Movement Penalties
Characters are assumed to be able to make minor adjustments such as

All-out movement lasts until the round after the hero decides to stop.
He doesn't get any actions in the

ComBA these creatures don't move any
faster than a man on foot, although they can drastically increase a hero's canrying capacity.
Fast-moving mounts such as horss or camels use the movement rates noted below in TAsLE G10: MOUNTED TaaveL. The Constitution score of the animal is the best way to determine the mount's quality.
Combat

ducking behind cover or throwing themselves on the ground with no penalty. The faster a character tries to move, the more involved he is in covering ground and the more diffi-

round during which he stops moving but he can participate in the next action check that comes up and resume the normal sequence of events.

cult it is to undertake other actions at

the same time. See TaBLE P11: CoMBAT

the MoVEMENT EFFECTS in Chapter 3 of Many heroes live for that noble mo-

Player's Handbook.

ment when the opportunity arises to

All-Out Movement A hero fleeing from certain death, or

face the evil villain in a trial by combat. Heroes brawl with ruffians in sleazy bars, shoot it out with armed

Movement
Intactical situations, it often important to know how far a hero or a crea-
ture can move with one action.
Movement within an action round is often called combat movement. Movement rates vary depending on a heros Strength and Dexterity scores, Move- as given on TABLE P8: COMBAT MENT RATES on page 39 of the Players Handbook

trying to close the range on an
enemy who's a long way off, might choose to use all-out movement.
In all-out movement, the hero is allowed to move in every phase-- Amazing, Good, Ordinary, and Marginal. He can sprint, run, fly, swim, or even walk if he chooses to do so. However, that's all that the hero can do in that action round. He pays for the privilege of moving in each phase by surrendering his action

guards in secret bases, and blast their way through hordes of alien monstrosities--combat is one of the most exciting and spectacular fea tures of heroic fiction.
On the other hand, you may ask yourselt why you should include combat at all. It's your game, adter all, and if you want to stress roleplaying and cooperation over confrontation, you should do that.
Before you make that decision,

Heroes on Foot
Heroes on foot can use their walk, 1un, or sprint rates, moving the appropriate number of meters any time they take an action to do so. In a tactical situation, a hero can walk or
run for as long as he likes--most
fights don't last longer than five to ten rounds.

check. He can't shoot at the villains, attempt a flying tackle of a bad guy
getting away from him, use a com-
puter, or display his charm. To begin all-out movement, a hero
must spend an action. For example, if a hero with two actions rolls a Good action check, he might make an attack in the Good phase. In the Ordinary phase, he can declare that

you should consider a few reasons for including combat in your game.
First, it gives your players a way to
directly confront and defeat the bad guys. Blowing an inedeemable vil lain into smoking ashes with a right-
eous fury is a clear way to get to the
bottom of things. Maybe it's simplification, but that's okay. Combat carries the threat of injury or death,

he's switching to all-out movement giving a vicarious thrill to the player

and run or sprint in that phase and whose hero defies danger and lives

the Marginal phase.

totell the tale. Consciously or sub- 4]

< consciously, players want to be as courageous and valorous as the heroes they create.

b

Your job in the course of a combat

scene is to decide what the opposi-

tion is up to. Will they surrender

meekly, or defy the heroes with guns

blazing? Can they flee to fight anoth-

erday, or will they stand their
ACTION

ground? What else might be going

tion is a key ingredient in setting up
a fight. Make use of the supporting character templates in Chapter 6: Supporting Cast if you don't have the specifics of the villains at hand.
You should also give thought to the type of fight, the surroundings, the likelihood of reinforcements or hazards affecting the course of the battle, and other such details. Fight-

IH

on to complicate the situation--dam- ing on top of a moving train is cool--

age to the local area, weather or nat- but what are the chances of

ural phenomenda, the arrival of other knocking someone off the side?

characters?

You'll present a much more interest-

Above all, keep a combat scene

ing and exciting combat scehe if you

moving. Don't let it bog down into

don't have to stop and look things up.

bouts of rolling dice. Encourage the Don't hesitate to eyeball the situa-

players to try to find an edge by having their heroes maneuver for position, use technical skills to juryrig their GAMEMASTERS
weapons or defenses, or trick

tion and improvise.
The Combat Scale
Weapon ranges, areas of effect, and

opponents. Use active descriptions and keep the players aware of what's going on around their characters.

combat movement are expressed in meters. A typical combat scene might involve a hero engaged in a shootout with a villain at a range of

Setting Up

10 meters. By specifying a range, you know how quickly characters can

`When the heroes become embroiled
in a combat scene, it's your job to run
the opposition. You make the tactical
decisions for the villains, roll any at-
tacks they direct at the heroes, and keep track of the damage each vil-

close for hand-to-hand combat, whether they're caught in the area of
effect from a heavy weapon, and what range modifiers apply for their weapons.

lain or creature suffers at the hands
of the heroes. Because you'll need to know the

Surprise The effect of surprise may allow one

combat-oriented abilities, skills, and equipment of the villains, prepara-

side to win a free phase of actions for attack, retreat, or even a quick surrender. Naturally, if there's no
physical threat to the heroes, or a

threat that can't possibly sneak up
on them, then there's no reason to

see if anyone was surprised--just
proceed to the first action round or open the encounter normally.

The Surprise Check
The defense against surprise is the Awareness skill. The specialty skills intuition and perception reflect the hero's ability to detect danger before it strikes.
Perception is the appropriate specialty skill when the character has a chance to observe or notice the
enemy. Hidden traps and ambushes should cause perception checks. Intuition represents an ability to sense danger when no obvious signs are evident. Enemies using decoys, and misdirection and unexpected attacks cause intuition checks.
Every character who stands a chance of being surprised at the beginning of a scene must make an

Awareness check. It's best if you roll these checks for both heroes and villains. It ruins much of the suspense of ascene if the players know their heroes are about to be surprised.
You can always decide that the heroes are surprised without the need for aroll. Maybe they were distracted, or maybe they weren't paying attention.
Surprise Check
Muodifiers
The subject's Awareness check may
be modified to reflect the quality of the surprise attempt--the skill with which the surprise was set up. It can
also be aifected by the conditions at the time. An ambush expert with fa-
vorable terrain could conceivably set up an attack that inflicts a +5 or +6 penalty on the heroes' Awareness. checks to detect it. See the "Surprise
Modifiers" sidebar for a list of factors
that may affect a surprise check.
# Example: The Gamemaster de-
cides that a hidden sniper in camouflage gear sets up his ambush with «
Good success at Stealth-hide, caus-
ing @ +2 penalty to the heroes'
Awareness checks. He's in medium
cover, which adds a +2 penalty to the heroes' Awareness-perception skill checks, for a total of a +4 penalty.
Blind Meetings
When two groups blunder into each
other, or one group barges into a room without knowing what might be waiting for them, it's a blind meeting. Characters from both sides
make Awareness checks with the
standard modifiers. The group in motion suffers a penalty for terrain, if any; if both groups are moving, there is no terrain adjustment.
Effects of Surprise
At the beginning of a combat scene in which at least one character or creature is surprised, a spacial procedure is added to the combat sequence: the surprise phase. It takes place before any action checks are made. Any character who was surprised doesn't get to do amything in the surprise phase. Any character who avoided surprise is permitted to
take an action.
˘ Example: The heroes are waiting for a security patrol to come by. They set up a nasty ambush. Since the Gamemaster figures that the patrol doesn't have any real chance to sneak up on the heroes, only the

guards have to roll surprise checks. As it turns out, two guards are sur prised, but the third isn't.
The heroes open fire in the sur prise phase, starting the ambush. The two surprised guards can't re turn fire in this phase, but the third guard can and does. After all nonsur prised characters have taken their actions, the surprise phase ends, and it's time for the first action check of the scene. In the following round, the surprised guards can act whenever their action checks dictate--if they survived.
Combat Options
Heroes and villains have more op tions than just standing still and blasting away with their weapons. The best defense against getting shot is placing something large and sturdy between you and the enemy. Heroes can enjoy any advantage of position they can find.
Naturally, a hero has to have an action available in order to move--a hero with a Marginal action check can't move a meter until the Margin al phase comes up. In one phase a hero can, for example:
» Walk a number of meters equal

to his walk rating, with no penalty to other actions.
» Run at his listed rate, suffering a +2 penalty to any other actions he attempts.
» Sprint at his listed rate, with a +3 penalty to any other actions he
attemplts. » Swim or engage in allout
movement at his listed rate but take no other actions while moving.
Be generous with movement. For ex ample, if a hero has to stretch one extra meter to reach the elevator doors, you can let him slip through. Even in combat, the game is about fun and roleplaying, not computation of distances. Exact precision isn't necessary.
Making Attacks
An attack uses one of the following broad or specialty skills: Athletics throw, Heavy Weapons, Melee Weap ons, Unarmed Attack, Acrobatics--de fensive martial arts, Modern Ranged Weapons, or Primitive Ranged Weapons. To determine what situa tion die to use for an attack:
» Find the base situation die for the attack skill being used. If a spe cialty skill is used, the base situation die is +d0 if a broad skill is used, the base situation die is +d4.
» Add any penalties for damage the attacker has received.
» Apply the target''s resistance modifier.
» Apply modifiers for the target's range and cover.
» Account for special defensive devices or tactics, such as a deflec tion harness or dodging.
» Account for offensive tactics, position, advantage, or devices, such as aiming, accuracy of the weapon, or stealth.
That may seem like a long list of things to take into account, but it's unusual for more than two or three of these circumstances to be in play. In many cases, the defender might add +2 or +3 steps to the attack, while the attacker's advantages counter this by 3 or 4 steps. You only need to determine the net modifier to the roll and apply it to the base situation die.
@ Example: While investigating an enemy base, Jack Everstar de cides to take out a lazy security guard quietly. He's using his Melee

Weaponsblade skill, which has a
base situation die of +d0. The guard has a +1 resistance modifier against Strengthbased attacks but he's prone, which gives the attack a 2
bonus. The net is a 1 bonus from the base situation of +d0, so Dave, Jack's player, rolls d20d4, trying to achieve a result less than or equal to his hero's skill score.

B

Unarmed

Attacks

SHILSENINGD

Unarmed combat is based on one of I
three specialty skills: Unarmed At

tackbraw! or power martial arts, or

Acrobaticsdefensive martial arts. If

a hero doesn't have any of these spe

cialty skills or the Unarmed Attack

NOILDH

broad skill, use his or her untrained

Strength score. The target of an un

armed attack defends with his Strength resistance moditier.

The base damage for an unarmed

character is d4s/d4+1s/d4+2s. Heroes

with the power martial arts skill,

high ranks in the brawl skill, or the

Fists of Iron perk do more damage in

unarmed combat. High Strength can also increase the damage, as shown

on TABLE P9: STRENGTH & DAMAGE on

page 40 in the Player's Handbook.

Expert brawlers and martial artists have an increased likelihood of knocking out their targets when

they get an Amazing result. Refer to

"Unarmed Attack Rank Benefits" on

page 69 in the Player's Handbook.

Overpowering
Sometimes, the best move is to grab and restrain the enemy. To overpow
er, a hero makes an attack skill check with a +1 penalty.

Each ally who joins in an over-

Once o target is held, the attacker

power attempt in the same phase

or attackers have a few choices of

b provides a -1 bonus to the hero's skill what to do next,

check. For example, if a trio of thugs

» Improve the Hold: The holding

are trying to take down a hero, the

character can attempt to get a better

attack roll is based on the toughest hold in later phases, but he risks los-

thug's Unarmed Attack-braw! score ing his hold altogether with a failed

with a +1 penalty, but the other two attack. An improved hold results in

ACTION thugs move that to a -1 bonus.

an increased penalty to the target, as

You can choose to set a realistic noted above.

IN

limit on the number of attackers who

» Bum's Rush: With a second over-

can surround a single target. given power attack, a held character can

limitations of space and the size of

be dragged, pushed into a cell, or

the target and his attackers.

generally moved from where he

1f the overpower attack is success- stands.

ful, the attacker or attackers have a hold on the target equal to the degree of success of the attack. The held character suffers a +1, +2, or +3 pendlty to skill checks while held. in GAMEMASTERS
For example, a Good attack result
dicates a Good hold--the held character has a +2 penalty to all actions.

» Maul: A held character can be strangled or struck with @ normal skill check for normal unarmed damage; it the attack fails, the hold is lost.
» Takedown: A second successful overpower attack maintains the hold and puts the held character on the

ground, where he'll also have penal-

ties for being prone (+2 penalty to his

attacks; -2 bonus to attackers). Char-

acters with the defensive martial arts skill can attempt a takedown without first gaining a hold.
» Pin: A held character on the ground can be pinned with a third overpower attack. These three over-

Blocking
A character with rank 2 or higher in Acrobatics-defensive martial arts can attempt a block. Blocking requires that the character make an Acrobatics-defensive martial arts

`power attacks must be made in con-
secutive phases in which the attacker can act. A pinned character can't get free until the attacker or attackers choose to allow it.

skill check and compare his result to the attacker's result. The character who blocks must achieve a degree of success equal to or better than the attacker's degree of success. If the at-

In order to break a hold, the victim must make a skill check using Un-

tacker achieves a worse result, no damage is inflicted by the attack.
A character can only block in a

armed Attack-braw! or power martial arts, or Acrobatics--defensive martial arts or feat check using Strength or Dexterity. If successful,

phase when he has an action available; a character who achieves Good action check result can't at-
tempt to block an attack directed

the hero escapes the hold; on an Amazing success, the hero can immediately act in the same phase.
# Example: Jealous of Jack Everstar's fame and good looks, Mad Dog

against him in the Amazing phase. Only one attack is countered, and no other actions can be attempted in the same phase in which a character attempts to block.

decides to take him down with an overpower attack. This is a normal

When a character reaches rank 4 in defensive martial arts, he can at-

attack with a +1 penalty, plus any resistance modifier Everstar has. Mad Dog scores @ Good hit, which gives Jack a +2 penalty to all skill checks and combat actions he attempts.
In Jack's next action, he attempts a Dexterity feat check to wriggle free, with a +2 penalty for being in a Good hold. He gets an Amazing success, which frees him from the hold--and allows him to spin around and drill Mad Dog with a mass pistol

tempt a reaction block whenever an Unarmed Attack is directed against him. The block attempt uses up the character's next available action. For example, a hero who achieves an Ordinary action check result and has 2 actions per round could attempt to block attacks directed against him in the Amazing and Good phases. If a hero who attempts to block an attack has no actions remaining in the current round, he can still make the at-

tempt. As a result, he loses his first

available action in the next round. After this point, no further blocks can be attempted.
Melee Attacks
A hero uses the Melee Weapons broad skill or its blade, bludgeon, or powered weapon specialty skills to make a melee attack. A hero who
doesn't have Melee Weapons uses his untrained Strength score. The target of a melee attack applies his Strength resistance modifier to the attacker's skill check.
The damage depends on the weapon the character uses, adjusted by the hero's damage modifier for a high or low Strength score. For the damage caused by a melee weapon, see Chapter 11: Weapons & Armor in the Player's Handbook.
Cover and range don't come into play in a melee attack. If a character is close enough to swing a sword at
someone, he's close enough to delib erately swing around any obstacles and see the target just fine. Only darkness, injury, or extreme weather conditions should hinder a melee at
tack. See "Modifiers to Unarmed and Melee Attacks."

Parrying Melee weapons prove their value through parrying. A character with a melee weapon or a shield can at tempt to parry a Melee Weapons or Unarmed Attack skill used against him (not a ranged attack).
When parrying with a weapon such as a sword or a club, a charac ter makes a Melee Weapons skill check using the appropriate special
ty skill for the weapon being used to
parry. When parrying with a shield,
a character makes an Armor Opera tioncombat armor skill check. A character who is untrained or has
just the broad skill can attempt to
parry, but those with ranks in an ap propriate specialty skill have a bet ter chance of successtfully parrying an attack.
Compare the check result of the parrying character to the attacker's result. The parrying character must achieve a success that's equal to or greater than the attacker's success. If the attacker gets a worse result, then no damage is inflicted by the attack.
A character can only parry ina phase when he has an action avail able a character who achieves a Good action check result can't at tempt to parry an attack directed against him in the Amazing phase. Only one attack is deflected, and no other actions can be attempted in the same phase in which a character at tempts to parry.
When a character reaches rank 4 in a Melee Weapons specialty skill, he can attempt a reaction parry whenever a melee attack or unarmed attack is used against him. The parry attempt uses up the character's next available action. For example, a hero who achieves an Ordinary ac tion check result and has 2 actions per round could attempt to parry at tacks directed against him in the Amazing and Good phases, but then he'd haye no actions remaining for the Ordinary and Marginal phases. If a hero who attempts to parry an at tack has no actions remaining in the current round, he can still make the attempt. As a result, he loses his first available action in the next round. After this point, no further parries can be attempted.
A character can use his offhand weapon or a shield to parry apply the normal penalties associated with
using two weapons at the same time (+2/+4). The character uses the parry

rules described above, though he can make an attack in the same phase in which he parries. If a char
acter using two weapons or a weapon and a shield makes a reac tion parry, he must wait until the phase indicated by his action check comes up to actually make his at
tack, though both skill checks re ceive the appropriate twoweapon
penalties. @ Example: A skilled character
who gets an Ordinary result on his action check could choose to make a
parry with his shield in the Good phase at a +4 penalty and attack
with his blade later during the Ordi nary phase at a +2 penalty.

B
SHILSUWINGD NI

NOILJY

4

-- You may allow characters with large ranged weapons and the appropriate ranks of Melee Weapons-

b

bludgeon or blade skill to attempt a

parry in times of desperation. Since

most rifles arent intended for close-

quarters combat, it's reasonable to

apply a +2 penalty to the attempt.

ACTION

IN

GAMEMASTERS

Ranged Attacks

shot is actually a d20+d6. Raterman's

Ranged combat is based on one of four skills: Modern Ranged Weapons, Primitive Ranged Weapons, Heavy Weapons, or Athletics-throw. A hero lucking the proper skill must use his or her untrained Strength score (for heavy weapons and throwing) or un trained Dexterity score (for primitive and modern ranged weapons).
Unusually high or low Strength
scores modify the damage inflicted
with thrown weapons such as spears, knives, or axes; see Table P9 in the Player's Handbook. This rule
does not apply to thrown grenades.

player then adds a +d8 and +d12 to his fistful of dice and throws them all at once. The control die applies to all
three shots.
Raterman has a skill score of 13 with his SMG. His control die comes up 5, and the other three dice are a1, 7,and 11 in that order. Thus the total results are 6, 12, and 16. Of these, the 6is a Good hit, the 13 is an Ordinary hit, and the 16 goes high and misses.
Each hit in an autofire attack is treated separately for the purpose of
determining damage. Don't add the
damage together before making armor rolls.

Autaomatic Weapons
Some ranged weapons have the abil ity to lire in burst or autofire mode. A
burst is treated like a normal ranged attack, except that the firing character gains a -1 bonus to his skill check to reflect the greater likelihood of hitting his target. The disadvantage is that the weapon uses ammo faster.
Autofire, on the other hand, can be spectacular. Using a single control die, the hero makes three attacks using three situation dice. The first attack is at a +1 penalty, the second ata +2 penalty, and the third at a +3 penalty. Autofire may strike three different targets, or hammer one opponent for as many as three hits.

A common tactic with autofire is hitting several enemies at once. The targets must be within 6 meters of each other, and the firing character must have a clear line of sight on each. The attacker always computes the situation die of the first shot on the most difficult target he's firing at, and then adds the pendlties for the second and third shot from there. In other words, if a hero is shooting at
one target with a +4 resistance modi-
fier and another with a +1 resistance modifier, he has to base the burst on the hard-to-hit guy (first shot at a +5 step penalty) and roll the second and third shots accordingly (at a +6 and a +7 step penalty, respectively).

# Example: Raterman blasts away at the hideous alien. After all other factors have been considered, his skill check begins at d20+d4. Since he's chosen full auto, the first

Area-Effect Attacks
Another special type of ranged attack is the area-effect atlack. Weapons that deliver explosive warheads don't damage only the point of im-

Friendly Fire

46

P

Long

12 m

Failure

[

Ordinary Goad Amazing

4m
on target on target 2m
always on target

* For thrawn objects or indirect fire weapons

SHILSUWINY

pact, but can also injure creatures in the general vicinity. Area-effect
weapons include grenades and ban-
tam rockets. When a character attacks with an
area-effect weapon, he first chooses an aiming point. This can be an
enemy, or a point on the ground.
the hero aims at character, the target's resistance modifier applies. If he lobs the attack at a point on the ground, no resistance modifier applies. Aiming at the ground has the disadvantage that targets may move out of the area of effect during the phase.

The damage caused by an area effect weapon is determined by the specific weapon and the distance
from the detonation point. Therefore,
all area-effect weapons have a dam
age rating graded on the number of
meters they miss by. For example, the fragmentation grenade inflicts Amazing damage (d6+2w) to any tar get within 2 meters. Good damage (d4+2w) to any target within 6 meters, and Ordinary damage (d4w) to any target within 10 meters of its detonation point. This damage is not cumulative; only the highest damage value is applied

`The result of the skill check deter-
`mines how close to this aiming point

the weapon lands or strikes--ground 2ero for the area-effect attack
Most area-effect weapons miss by adistance determined by the range and the attack roll indicated on TagLE exam- P20: ACCURACY BY RANGE. For ple, a hero who throws a grenade at medium range and gets an Ordinary success still misses his target by 2 meters. Usually, the exact fall of the weapon is a random result determined by use of the scatter diagram atright

Under unusual circumstances the Gamemaster can select the impact

point of the weapon. For
ahero s trying to throw

instance, if a grenade

into the narrow firing slit of a rein-

forced bunker, you might decide that

any miss bounces off the bunker's

face and blows up just outside. Fir-

ing @ guided missile into a forest is

likely to resull in the destruction of a

free, not the target.
Once you've determined how far from the target the weapon lands, and in what direction, you can see if any other characters or objects besides the actual aiming point might be atfected by the atlack

Point Blank

NI

You may allow characters to receive a bonus to attacks from extremely

close range. Point-blank shots occur

at arange of less than | meter. Pis 0IL26

tols, rifles, SMGs, and heavy weapons (direct) receive a -3 bonus for

shooling in this range.

Ammo Expenditure
Players should keep track of how
much ammo their heroes use up. Nor mal fire expends a single round for each attack; burst fire expends one burst, or three rounds: and cutolire three bursts, or nine rounds, every


P
ACTION IN
GAMEMASTERS

phase. All firearms have a clip size as noted in Chapter 11: Weapons &
Armor in the Player's Handbook. For
example, an 11mm charge rifle holds
enough ammunition for 30 single shots or 10 bursts before its maga zine is emptied.
When a clip or charge cartridge is
emptied, it takes one action for the hero to replace it. Optionally, the hero can change a clip and shoot in the same phase at a +2 penalty.
Characters who have achieved rank
3 in Modern Ranged WeaponsSMG can change a clip and fire a subma chinegun in the same round without penalty.
Revolvers and derringers don't have clips--each bullet must be loaded by hand. Reloading the weapon requires a phase, and no shots are allowed.
Finally, some weapons must be re loaded after every shot. Flintlocks

and crossbows are good examples. One action spent reloading allows one shot betfore the hero must reload the weapon again.
Special Combat
Conditions
Fighting in chestdeep water is a lot different from fighting in a boxing ring. Heroes routinely find the strangest places to get into combat, with numerous hazards, restricted spaces, and lousy footing hindering them.
Poor Terrain
Heroes are efficient allterrain vehi cles, able to scale 90° slopes, swim wide rivers, and leap from boulder to boulder in a jumbled rockiall. Even so, terrain conditions can slow even the most determined athlete.
Varied terrain (sand, light forest,

or jungle) reduces a character's movement rates--sprint, run, or walk--Dby 50%. A hero with a sprint of 20 could only sprint at a rate of 10 meters per action in Varied terrain. Rugged terrain reduces movement even more. See TABLE G11: TERRAIN IN CoMBAT.
The chief effect of a patch of bad terrain is to keep characters under
fire longer than normal. A charging enemy might normally cross a clear ing in a single round, limiting the heroes to one or two shots to drop him--but if that same enemy has to slog through a slimy morass, he might take several rounds to cross the open space, during which time the heroes can easily pick him off.
Limited Visibility
You can't shoot at something you can't see. On a moonless night, a human can make out large objects

Action Checks

Teamwork

Smaoth Varied
Rugged

none Ye narmal
Y normal

firm sand, earth, light brush
knee-deep water, loose sand, jungle,
moving uphill waist-deep water, deep snow or mud,
thick jungle, steep slope

such as houses and trees at 50 meters away. With a bit of light, visibility can extend to a kilometer under such circumstances. Total darkness, on the other hand, features acloudy, moonless night with rain or

blowing snow, or an interior room with no lights on. Penalties for limit-
ed visibility in combat are shown on
the TABLE G12: VISIBILITY IN COMBAT, on following page.

-- Special Tactics
The basics of the combat system are

easy, but advanced want more choices

players may for special situa-

B

tions. Some of these are introduced

in the Player's Handbook, and a few

more are here. You have complete

discretion over whether or not any

special tactics can be used.

Aiming
A character making an attack with o

o heavy ranged weapon a direct fire

SHILSHMIWGD

`weapon can spend an action aiming

before the attack is made. Aiming HI

provides a -1 bonus to the next at-

tack, provided the hero makes the attack in the next phase he is entitled

toact.

It's not possible to aim when using HOILDY

burst or autofire modes.

Supporting Cast Action Checks & Teamwork (cont.
.

P

starlight, dark building

ACTION

total darkness, underground

IN
Called Shot A hero who wants to hit a very pre-
cise target can declare a called shot
before he makes his skill check, adding a +4 pendlty. Called shots can be used for a variety of special purposes, detailed below. It's not possible to use burst or autofire with acalled shot GAMEMASTERS
» Disarm: A called shot can strike @ weapon out of an opponent's hand in melee combat or in ranged combat. If the shot is successful, the target is disarmed but suffers no damage. Usually, a disarmed character can retrieve his weapon with his next action.
» Dead-Eye Shot: A called shot can place a shot or a melee strike exactly where it will hurt the most. The dead-eye shot automatically increases the degree of success by one grade, if it hits: An Ordinary success becomes Good, and Good becomes Amazing. Amazing results are unatfected, and a miss is still a miss. Dead-eye shots are particularly usetul for getting solid hits on heavily armored enemies.
> Equipment Damage: A called
shot can damage something another character is holding or carrying. For example, a hero might decide to riddle the enemy's data slate with bullets to ensure that stolen files don't survive the fight. Naturally, this subjects the object in question to an attack. See "Property Damage" later in this chapter.
» Style Shot: A called shot can strike an opponent with an attack that inflicts no damage except humiliation. It singes clothing with a laser beam, cuts hair with a sword, removes a button from a suit, or performs some other obnoxious display of superiority. Usually this gets people mad--or scared. A Failure on a style shot embarrasses the attacker instead, without doing physical damage to anyone.
3 » Trick Shot: The hero attempts some outlandish feat of marksman-

ship, like severing a rope at 100 meters, throwing a knife to knock a car into gear, or any similar feat. 1f the
shot is really ludicrous, incredse the penalty to +6 or more.
Charge
A common tactic for entering a handto-hand fight is a charge. A charging hero ignores the penalties associated with attacking while running and gains a -2 bonus to his skill check. On the downside, his opponents gain a2 bonus to strike him during his heroic dash. Once a character is engaged in melee combat with the enemy, it's impossible to charge again until the hero is free and clear
of the fight.
Suppressive Fire
Suppressive fire is intended to force the enemy to keep his head down and ruin any shots he's taking. It's especially useful for protecting an ally who's trying to cross open ground. When a character declares that he's using suppressive fire, he makes a normal skill check, but instead of inflicting damage, the result of the check inflicts a +1, +2, or +3 penalty to any ranged attacks that the target makes during this phase.
Suppressive fire with an automatic weapon is particularly effective,
since the character laying down the
covering fire can affect the attacks of up to three enemy characters.
The effects of suppressive fire aren't cumulative. The enemy's skill check is only affected by the best suppressive fire result used against him, not the sum of all suppressive fire.
Suppressive fire has a different effect on targets that aren't aware of,
or don't care about, the threat. Many
animals won't be deterred unless they are injured, and an enemy in a superior position (such as inside body tank) is unlikely to keep his head down because someone's
shooting at him with a pistol. For tar-

gets such s these who opt to ignore. suppressive fire, normal damage is rolled for the result indicated.
# Example: Mad Dog unleashes his 11mm charge rifle in autofire mode, laying down suppressive fire on three enemies to allow Everstar to reach the computer console. Mad Dog rolls | Good success and 2 Ordinary successes against the targets.
Normally, this would give a +2 penal1y to the first target and a +1 penalty 10 the other two, The last target, however, decides to ignore the suppres-
sive fire. This enemy doesn`t have the +1 penalty on his shot, but does suffer an Ordinary hit from Mad Dogs rifle.
Sneak Attacks
Heroes with the Stealth skill (or
using the skill at the untrained level)
can maneuver for a sneak attack during a fight. The situation must
present available cover or obscurity,
or the victim must be approached from the rear. For example, a stealthy character could walk right up 1o his victim in a crowd, creep up through underbrush, or simply sneak
up on him when the fellow is looking
the other way. You can choose to disallow any sneak attack in which the hero doesn't have the opportunity to get out of his target's sight before striking
The hero's Stealth skill check de-
termines his success in maneuvering
into position. The result of the check provides a bonus to the first atlac)
Ordinary, -1; Good, -2 Amazing, -3.
The hero can execute his sneak attack with a melee weapon, an unarmed attack, or a ranged attack.
Threaten Instead of making a normal attack, a character can threaten the enemy with his weapon. The hero makes a skill check, but instead of inflicting damage he has threatened the target. In any subsequent phase or round, he can automatically strike before the threatened target, whether or not he has an action available and regardless of his action check. The damage of the attack is determined by the initial skill check.
The threatening character must be within striking distance if using a melee weapon or within maximum range if using a ranged weapon. The threat is broken if the threatening character uses an action to do any-

thing other than keep an eye on the covered character, or if something or someone gets between the two characters.
Only the most fanatic or stupid enemies ignore the fact that they're threatened by a character. If appro priate, you can require a Will feat check to see if the threatened char acter keeps on fighting.
Attacking with
Two Weapons
When a hero employs two weapons at the same time, he makes two sep arate skill checks. For example, a hero wielding two pistols makes two separate pistol shots each phase he shoots. However, using two weapons at once is tricky the character suf fers a +2 penalty with his primary hand, and a +4 penalty with his sec ondary hand.
It a character is Ambidextrous (see Chapter 5: Perks & Flaws), the penalty is negated for the primary hand, and drops to +2 for the sec ondary hand.
A good tactic to use when fighting with a melee weapon in each hand is to make attacks with the primary weapon, but reserve the secondary weapon for parries. This allows the skilled character to make a parry (with a penalty for secondary hand use as above), without spending an action.
DAMAGE
When a character scores a hit with a skill check, the degree of success achieved dictates the amount and type of damage. Scoring an Amazing hit means more serious damage than scoring a Good or an Ordinary hit. The damage inflicted by any particu lar weapon is listed in Chapter 11: Weapons & Armor in the Player's Handbook.
Mcdifiers to the attack skill check affect damage indirectly. Shooting at someone with a 2 bonus is much more likely to resull in an Amazing hit than shooting at someone with a +2 penalty. In the case of a severe penalty, the attacker will be lucky if he scores a hit at all.
PSericmonardyaryandDamage
The damage listed for each weapon in the Player's Handbook is referred

B
SHILSHWINGD NI NOILDY
In a body tank, you're never outnumbered

-

and spaceships have Amazing toughness.
When an object or armor of Good

P

toughness is struck by a weapon of

Ordinary firepower (like a common

pistol or sword), the damage de-

grades. Mortal damage becomes

wound damage, wound damage be-

ACTION

comes stun damage, and stun dam-

age is ignored. This effect occurs

IN

belore any armor rolls or secondary

damage take place. After the dam-

age degrades, the armor then makes

anormal roll against the new prima

ty damage, and might negate some

ar all of this. Secondary damage is

based on the new primary damage. The effect is identical when an ob-

ject or vehicle of Amazing toughness

GAMEMASTERS

is struck by a weapon of Good firepower.

to as primary damage. Primary dam-
age can cause a side effect known as
secondary damage. Any time a character suffers wound damage, he also
suffers stun damage equal to one-
half the number of wounds (round down). When a character sustains mortal damage, he also suffers stun and wound damage equal to one-

ing reflects the armor's ability to stop high-velocity physical attacks like bullets and shrapnel. Finally, the energy (En) rating describes the armor's toughness against nonphysical at-

When an object of Amazing toughness is struck by a weapon of Ordi-
nary firepower, the damage
degrades twice. Mortal damage becomes stun damage, and wound and

tacks. The ratings of each armor are found in Chapter 11: Weapons & Armor in the Player's Handbook.
# Example: Everstar's sword in-

stun damage is ignored.
When a weapon's firepower equals or exceeds the toughness of its target, damage doesn't degrade.

half the number of mortals (round flicted 6 wounds and 3 stuns to the

down).

guard, but the fellow happened to be

# Example: Everstar makes a skill wearing a battle vest. This stops

check of d20-d4, comparing the re- d6-3 hits against a low-impact

sult to his Melee Weapons-blade weapon like a sword. The Game-

skill score of 14. He rolls a 7, for Good result. A broadsword inflicts

master rolls and determines that the vest absorbs 2 of the 6 wounds. The

d6+2 wounds on a Good hit. Everstar secondary stun damage is not affect-

rolls, and the target suffers 6 points ed. In total, the guard takes 4

of wound damage. As a side effect, wounds and 3 stuns from the attack. the target suffers 3 stun points of sec-

ondary damage.

Firepower and

Armor Armor is a standard part of the genre in many futuristic settings. Armor

Toughness
Firepower and toughness present a means to compare the damage resis-
tance of large and armored targets

protects a character by stopping
some or all of the primary damage

with the damaging capability of powerful weaponry.

inlicted by a successtul hit. Armor isn't effective against secondary damage. (Skill ranks in an Armor Operation specialty skill in conjunc-

All weapons have a firepower: Ordinary, Good, or Amazing. Most personal weapons are of Ordinary firepower, and many heavy weapons

5

tion with armor can allow a hero to absorb stun points, including those sulfered through secondary damage. See the skill description.)
Most types of armor have different protection ratings against different types of attacks. The low impact (LI) rating indicates how well the armor protects against muscle-powered weaponry, such as swords, maces, and bows. The high impact (HI) rat-

have Good firepower. Large vehicular weapons and spaceship weapons have Amazing firepower.
Armor and objects have a toughness rating. Humanoid species, most personal armor, and portable objects have Ordinary toughness. Vehicles, buildings, and a few types of personal armor (such as powered attack armor and body tanks) have Good toughness. Tanks, fortified buildings,

Hence, an Ordinary weapon (such as a pistol) doesn't degrade when firing at unarmed or lightly armored per
sonnel a Good weapon doesn't de
grade against heavily armored
personnel or the average vehicle an Amazing weapon doesn't degrade against tanks or spaceships.
The armored target can still be
brought down by heavy and accurate
smallarms fire, but it takes time. It's much more effective to find a weap on of Good or Amazing firepower
when dealing with tougher objects.
˘ Example: Imagine Jack Everstar attempting to stab a guard in a body tank. Since this armor has Good toughness, the 6 wounds Everstar in
{licts degrade to 6 stuns. Now the
guard makes an armor roll. Against low impact damage, the body tank stops 2d4+1 hits--in this case, a total of 6 hits. So, the armor blocks the 6
stuns of Everstar's sword thrust.
Everstar would need an Amazing success with lots of mortal damage to have a good chance against a
body tank with his sword.
Realizing the hopelessness of the
situation, Everstar makes a judicious retreat and returns with a plasma gun. He scores an Ordinary success with his attack, inflicting 7 wounds
on the armored guard. Since the
plasma gun is considered to be a weapon of Good firepower, these 7 wounds don't degrade. The guard's armor stops 2d4+1 hits (this time the
result is 5) and thus negates most of
the primary damage--but the 3 stuns of secondary damage get through and shake up the guard. Everstar is making progress.
Special Uses
You can use the rules for firepower and toughness for aliens or intelli gent machines as well. For example, an alien might have Good tough
ness, downgrading Ordinary fire
power used against it due to its extraordinary resilience. It's possible for an extremely tough alien to shrug
off normal weapons fire. Creatures of extreme durability
might have Amazing toughness. These should be quite rare, since a
party of heroes armed with personal weapons could only hope to do stun
damage to such a monster, and even then they'd need to roll hits inflicting mortal damage.
Damage resistance doesn't have to apply across the board to all kinds of attacks. Some creatures may be

resistant to one type of damage--low
impact (LI), high impact (HI), or ener
gy (En)--but affected normally by the
other categories. You can design op ponents who are resistant to all kinds of damage except one very specific type of weapon, such as son
ics, gravity devices, or even silver
bullets. A few creatures or objects might
be immune to damage of some types. A lake can't be hurt by impact dam age, although it's conceivable that an energy weapon could boil off its water. Use common sense, but re member that heroes should have a chance to inflict damage against the villains.

Effects

of

Damage

A character's or creature's durability
rating is divided into four kinds of damage: stun, wound, mortal, and fatigue. Most humans and members of humanoid species possess a num ber of stun and wound points equal to their Constitution score and a number of mortal and fatigue points equal to half their Constitution score (round up). Characters can lose all of their stun and wound points and still survive, but when a hero exhausts his mortal points, he dies.
There are any number of ways for your heroes to accumulate damage.
The most common is through com bat every time an enemy successful ly strikes a hero, the hero suffers damage based on the weapon the
villain is wielding, minus the effec tiveness of any armor. Heroes can also be damaged by dangerous envi ronments, falls, traps, or accidents. Finally, heroes might expend fatigue points by engaging in strenuous ac tivity such as sprinting or forced
marches.

Stun Damage

Battering, cuts and scrapes, bruising, and exposure to the elements are represented by stun damage.
When a hero sutfers stun damage that exceeds half his total stun rat
ing, you may choose to apply the op
tional rule for the hero being dazed. He suffers a +1 penalty to all actions due to pain and weariness.
When a hero runs out of stun points, he's knocked out. Characters are occasionally subjected to addi

tional stun damage (heavy stun)
after they run out of stun points. For each 2 points of stun damage a knockedout character sustains from a single attack, he suffers 1 point of wound damage.
Stun Recovery
Stun damage automatically disap pears at the end of a scene. Use of Medical Sciencetreatment or Knowledgefirst aid can remove stun damage during a scene and can also return consciousness to knockedout characters. See the appropriate skill
descriptions. A hero who doesn't receive med
ical attention remains unconscious
for the remainder of the round he was rendered unconscious, and all of the next round as well. Thereatter,
an unconscious hero can make a Re solvephysical resolve check every round to recover. Success brings con sciousness, and the degree of suc cess determines a number of stuns recovered: Ordinary, 2 stun points Good, 4 stun points Amazing, 6 stun points. Characters can't take any ac tions in the same round they recover all they do is wake up and take stock of their surroundings.

--
b
SHILSEWINGD I NOILDY

Wound Damage

Punctures, burns, serious cuts or slashes, fractures, and widespread systemic injury are included in the category of wound damage.
Every 2 points of wound damage a
character suffers also causes 1 point of secondary stun damage. Second ary damage bypasses armor see "Armor" above.
When a hero suffers wound dam age that exceeds half his total

wound raling, you may choose to

point of secondary wound damage. points of fatigue damage; a Failure

apply the optional rule for the hero (Secondary wound damage doesn't indicates 1 point of fatigue damage.

D being dazed. He suffers a +1 penalty lead to additional secondary stun

Any success indicates that no fa-

to all actions due to shock, blood

damage.) Secondary stun and wound tigue damage is sulfered as a result.

loss, and extreme pain. This is cumu- damage can cause knockout as

Fatigue checks are usually made

lative with any other penalties for

noted above. Armor can't absorb sec- at either the end of the activity, the

damage.

ondary damage.

end of the scene, or once per time

When a hero exhausts his wound Each point of mortal damage

unit for overland movement or labor.

ACTION points, he's knocked out. For every 2 causes a +1 penalty to all actions or Adjust the interval between fatigue

points of additional wound damage checks (including Stamina-en-

checks as you see appropriate for the

N

{heavy woundj suffered by the char- durance checks). For example, a hero severity of the activiy or situation.

acter in a single attack, he sustains 1 wha has suffered 3 points of mortal To reflect the difficulty of continued

point of mortal damage.

damage has a +3 penalty to do any- labor or exposure to fatigue-causing

At the end of a scene in which a

thing. This is cumulative with the

activity, you may decide that each

character suffers wound damage, a

penalties for excessive sturf and

Stamina-endurance check after the

fatigue check is rolled (see "Fatigue wound damage.

Damage"" below). regardless of

A character or creature that has

first is made with a cumulative +1
penalty.

whether the damage was healed

suffered any amount of mortal dam-

Each point of fatigue damage

during the scene.

age is considered to be dying. At the point causes a +1 penalty to all ac-

Wound Recovery GAMEMASTERS

end of the scene, a Stamina-endur- tions or checks (including Staminaance check is made. The result of the endurance checks). This is cumula-

Unlike stun damage, wound damage check determines if additional mor- tive with the penalties for excessive

does not disappear at the end of a

tal damage accrues: Critical Failure, stun, wound, and mortal damage.

scene; it lasts until a hero receives 2 additional points of mortal dam-

When a hero exhausts his fatigue

`medical treatment or has a chance to age; Failure, 1 additional point of

points, he must make a Resolve-

`heal naturally over days or weeks. mortal damage. On any success, the physical resolve check to avoid fall-

Medical Science-treatment and

character suffers no additional mor- ing unconscious.

surgery can heal wound damage. See the appropriate skill descrip-

tal damage. Following the end of the
scene, the dying character must con- Fatigue Recavery

tions. Without medical treatment,

tinue to make Stamina-endurance Recovery from latigue damage can

wounds take time to heal. Each

checks every hour with similar

only begin after a cessation of fa-

week, the hero is allowed to make a effects.

ligue-causing activity or exposure.

Resolve-physical resolve check. A

It all of a character's mortal boxes While a character is at rest, he or she

number of wound points are recovered based on the skill result: Criti-

are marked off, he dies. At the end of a scene in which a

can make a Resolve-physical resolve check every hour. The result of the

cal Failure, condition worsens and | character suffers mortal damage. a

check determines the number of fa-

additional wound is suffered; Mar-

fatigue check is rolled (see "Fatigue tigue points recovered: Critical Fail-

ginal, 1 wound recovered; Ordinary, Damage" below).

ure or Failure, none; Ordinary, 1;

2 wounds; Good, 3 wounds; Amazing,

Good. 2; Amazing, 3.

4 wounds.

Maortal Recavery

At your discretion, you may as-

`The unmodified skill check as-

Mortal damage doesn't naturally

sume complete recovery with a day's

sumes a state of minimal activity

heal; it can only be healed by the use rest or a dramatic interlude of suffi-

that places few stresses on the heros of a medical skill. Successful use of cient time.

body. If the hero restricts his activity Knowledge-first aid or Medical Sci-

to a hospital bed or a state of complete rest for the week, the check re-

ence-treatment can stabilize the
dying character and reduce the need

Death

ceives a-2 bonus. If he engages in

for Stamina checks to once every

No game mechanic exists for restor-

normal activity, the check receives a day. Medical Science-surgery is re- ing life to the dead. Resurrection

+2 penalty.

quired to actually improve the dying isn't available as a standard option.

I a character is unconscious be-

character's condition and heal mor- You can make character death in

cause all of his wound points have tal damage.

your game as final as you want it to

been lost, he can't regain conscious-

be. In a realistic or low-tech cam-

Fatigue Damage ness until at least 1point of wound
damage is healed.

paign, heroes will occasionally die. This isn't entirely bad. After all,

Fatigue damage represents exhaus- players won't feel like their charac-

Mortal Damage

tion. It may be caused by marches ters are at risk unless they think that and overload movement, heavy labor their characters can be killed by the

Mortal damage represents severe in- lasting longer than 10 minutes, expo- bad guys. A game without risk--or at

juries to vital parts of the body--a
bullet in the chest, a knife in the kid-

sure to cerlain harsh environments, or suffering wound or mortal dam-

least the illusion of it--isn't much of agame. In order for the players to be

neys, third-degree burns, and other age during a combat scene. When a entertained and challenged, they

nasty stuff.

hero engages in fatigue-causing ac- have to believe that their heroes

Every 2 points of mortal damage a tivity, a Stamina-endurance check is don't have guarantees of glorious

i character suffers also causes 1 point rolled. A Critical Failure result indi- victory and a stroll into the sunset.

of secondary stun damage and |

cates that the character suffers 2

On the other hand, players form

deep and personal attachments to their characters. No one enjoys reading of a beloved fictional character's senseless death, and your players are likely to feel the same way about

--
B

their characters. Indeed, the better

your game, the more attached to their characters the players will

become.

The risk of character failure and

death is cccepted in a story--but meaningless death is resented by

most players,

Think carefully before you allow a

SHILSHWINGI

random fall of the dice to kill a hero

inan insignificant scene. If a hero

I

has gotten in an unfortunate spot thiough sheer bad luck. it's okay for

you to pull your punches.

Cheat. Cheat big and cheat often.

Its your campaign and your story; as

HOILJY

long as the clandestine assistance

benefits the heroes and the interests

o agood story, you're doing right

Good ways to cheat include a care-

less reading of the dice--maybe you don't notice that it's a Good instead

of an Ordinary hit. Or introduce a

distraction or difficulty for a villain

that limits his effectiveness--run-

ning out of ammo, for example.

Maybe the villain just happens to fail his Stamina check at a critical moment. Use your discretion.
lithe dangers or opposition in
your game prove too much for a hero
and result in his unfortunate demise,
try to wring meaning from his sacri-
fice. Noble selflessness to save a comrade or take out a terrible dan-
ger is not a bad way for a hero to go
aut.Let the player feel like his hero made a difference while he appeared in the imaginary pages of the
story.

Countdown to catastrophe

Resuscitation?
All that said, medical technologies
may be available in your campaign that can revive a dead character. This should not be a routine occurrence.
It might only be possible in the
finest medical facilities, and even

vice waiting to be exploited--what might the hero's mysterious alien benelactors want in exchange for this restoration of life? How might the experience change the character?
Don't treat a brush with death as mundane--the heroes wouldn't

then there may be some definite lim its to the capabilities. Time might be of the essence; the longer a character
is dead, the more his tissues break

Property Damage

down, and the less likely it is that his. Heroes armed with high-powered en-

body will be able to support life

ergy weapons, powered armor, and

again. A limit of an hour or two hours, demolition charges tend to re

is pretly reasonable in this scenario. arrange landscape whether they

Unusual circumstances of death mean to or not. If you've got a pla

might open the door to the possibility of resurrection. For example, the phenomend of cold-water drowning has been well documented. In some cases, people have survived immersions o close o an hour, although

ma gun, who needs a door? Any object or material can be described by
three properties: its durability, its
toughness, and its armor.
Durability

it's certainly no guarantee--don't try
it at home. Freezing in super-cold environments, death by weird alien
toxins, or exposure to unearthly en-

For objects and vehicles, durability i score equal fo the object's mortal rating. Just how much damage can it sustain before it's blasted into

ergies might allow the possibility of ashes? Like living creatures, inani

a characters return to life.

mate objects have stun, wound, and

In general, a hero or his comrades mortal points. Stun damage is most-

3% should have to pay for a second

ly cosmetic. Wound damage repre-

chance at life. This is a great plot de- sents physical damage to an object's

--
D
ACTION N

GAMEMASTERS

structure. Mortal damage is extreme physical damage.
Size is an important determinant
in an object's durability. One good hit with an ax can take down a
sapling, but it takes a number of hits
1o cut down a large tree. For very large objects such as skyscrapers or
battleships, you can assign each
section its own durability score. At times, objects and vehicles may
be forced to make a durability check as aresult of damage or a specific situation. A durability check imitates the Stamina skill check or Constitution feat check a character might malke. The object's Stamina-endurance skill score equals its wound
rating (twice its mortal rating).
Toughness
As described under "Firepower and Toughness" above, toughness describes what scale is necessary to seriously damage the object or device. Objects are rated as Ordinary, Good, or Amazing.
Ordinary toughness objects don't have the mass or thickness to absorb alot of damage. Living creatures, light furniture, and small appliances are Ordinary objects.
Good toughness objects are bigger, sturdier, and generally harder to damage than Ordinary objects Many vehicles and light buildings or
56installations are considered Good. Amazing toughness objects are

large, sturdy, and unusually resistant to damage. A tank, armored spacecraft, heavy blast doors, or reinforced buildings would be considered Amazing
Armaor
Objects may be protected by an outer casing or surface that can deflect damage. Armor for objects works exactly like armor for characters--it absorbs some or all of the primary damage of an attack. Armor has no effect on secondary damage.
Here are some general guidelines for object armor ratings. Think of describing an object as either fragile or protected by light, moderate, or heavy armor. See TasLE G13; OprecT ARvOR.
Effects of Damage When a device or vehicle runs out of stun points, some minor failure usually results--a nonvital system breaks down, or a vital system ac-
quires a penalty to its operation.
This is described in some detail for vehicles (see Chapters 10 and 11), but you'll have to use your imagina-
tion for other machines.
A device or object that runs out of wound points almost certainly loses at least one vital function, and possibly more. A door or wall that's out of
wound points isn't going to keep
anyone out anymore--there's a hole big enough to get through. Losing

TABLE G13: DOBJECT ARMOR

Armor

Damage
Stopped none aa
d6+2 2da+1

mortal points means that large portions of the device or object have sustained permanent damage. Repair will be difficult and involve re placement of components. An object that runs out of mortal damage ceases to exist as a functional device, For example, the wall collapses or the tree topples. Rule of Common Sense Remember, keeping track of property damage isn't the point of the game. You don't have to determine the fate of every bullet that goes astray. This is only a quick sketch of how to handle the topic of breaking things when it's dramatically appropriate. A hero shouldn't be able to shoot a sate open or knock a house down with a normal pistol. Let common sense rule your decisions about what the heroes can and can't break, and how long it takes them to do it

HAZARDS
Guns and knives aren't the only way
for your heroes to meet an untimely end. The galaxy is a dangerous place. The secret research labs, in dustrial complexes, military bases, and alien ruins that heroes routinely investigate present certain danger. Heroes get pushed off buildings, ex posed to vacuum, electrocuted, in fected, burned, drowned, poisoned,
and irradiated. Being a hero is a
tough job, and it's part of your job to challenge your heroes.
Resisting Hazards
Heroes exposed to hazards are enti tled to a roll to avoid the worst of the effects. Usually, this is a Constitution feat check.
The amount of damage a hazard
inflicts is based on the success or failure of the Constitution feat check. A hero who generates an Amazing success manages to evade death or dismemberment. On the other hand, a hero who rolls a Critical Failure stumbles headlong into grisly doom. Sometimes, a hero may sustain sig nificant damage despite a success
ful check: nasty hazards inflict damage on any result, but less damage with an Amazing or Good success.
You should apply modifiers that you feel are appropriate to Constitu tion feat checks caused by hazards.
Acid
Acid and caustic chemicals aren't
fun at all. Heroes might be struck by flasks of acid flung at them by cack ling mad scientists, or they could fall into vats of dangerous chemicals.
The average, powertful acid inflicts
damage as shown on TABLE G14: Acip DAMAGE.

Acid presents a more potent threat
since it continues to do damage for rounds after immediate exposure. If a character is able to neutralize the acid by an immediate cleansing or similar process to remove the acid, the damage ceases. Deadlier chemi cals could inflict higher damage (use d6 or d8 increments) fasteracting chemicals might affect the victim
once per action phase. Weaker chem ical could do less damage or cause damage once every minute.
Corrosive substances may destroy equipment at your discretion. Guns and heavy armor are fairly resistant to acid, but more vulnerable items could be wrecked by immersion.

Contracting a horrible disease isn't heroic, but it does create the opportu
nity for a character to battle through
illness. As a general rule, heroes don't stand a chance of getting sick unless you think that it might be dra
matically or realistically appropri ate. Here are some guidelines:
P The hero suffers wound damage that is left untreated.
» The hero breathes, drinks, or eats in an extraterrestrial environ ment without taking precautions.
» The hero is wounded by a dis eased animal.
» The hero is exposed to an area or item contaminated with a conta gious disease.
When a character is exposed to a disease, he must make a Constitu tion feat check to resist this hazard.

Check Result Critical failure Failure
Ordinary
Good Amazing

Effect
Terminally ill
Extremely ill m
No effect No effect

Crit. Failure

3dAw *

Failure

2edaw*

Ordinary

d4w

Good

no damage

no damage

* Ddam4ageper r«ound.nues each round, diminishing by

This initial feat check to resist the
disease may be modified by the dis ease's strength, as shown on the table below. You choose the strength of the disease.

<
B

Strength
Marginal Ordinary Good Amazing

Modifier
1 bonus no modifier +1 penalty +3 penalty

The effects of a disease aren't imme

diately felt. You decide how quickly

SHILSHHIWYD

the disease manifests. The incuba

tion of a disease refers to how long it NI

takes before the victim begins to ex

perience symptoms. Before onset, the

disease is detectable with a medical

examination, and it can be treated

preemptively by means of the Medi

NOILDY

cinetreatment skill. Most diseases have Marginal or Ordinary incuba

tion. See the table below.

Incubation Marginal
Ordinary
Good
Amazing

Onset 1d4 weeks
2d4 days
1d4 days
3d4 hours

Disease Effects

If a doctor doesn't catch the disease

before the first symptoms appear, the

victim becomes sick.

Il characters suffer a +2 penalty

to all actions. Each day, the charac ter must attempt a Constitution feat

check: Critical Failure or Failure,

worsen to extremely ill Ordinary, no

change Good or Amazing, the char acter recovers.

Extremely ill characters are al

most completely incapacitated. In

desperate situations, an extremely

ill character may attempt a Resolve

physical resolve check to force him

self to his feet, but all actions receive

a +3 penalty. Each day, the character

must make a Constitution feat check:

Critical Failure or Failure, worsen to

terminally ill Ordinary, no change

Good, improve to ill Amazing, recov

er completely.

Terminally ill characters are co

matose, although they can rouse

themselves for a few words of con

versation with a Resolvephysical

resolve check. Every six hours, the

character must attempt a Constitu

tion feat check: Critical Failure, suf

fer 2 points of mortal damage

Failure, suffer 1 point of mortal dam age Ordinary, no change Good or
Amazing, improve to extremely ill.

5

When the hero sustains mortal dam-

age, he must make a Stamina-en-

B durance check as if suffering mortal damage in combat; see "Mortal Damoge" above.

CON Feat
Check Result

Shock

Drowning

Crit. Failure Failure

di2w dBw

Submerged characters can automatiACTION cally hold their breath for a number

N

of rounds equal to one-half their

Constitution score before they begin

Ordinary Good
Amazing

dss das no damage

to drown. This assumes the charac-

GAMEMASTERS

ter has a moment to fill his or her Tungs with ir; otherwise, the character has only one round before drowning begins.
Therealter, standard rules for suffocation apply. See "Sutfocation" later in this chapter. Heroes who have purchased ranks in the Movement-swim speciclty skill have a bonus to their Stamina-endurance checks when holding their breath. Refer to the skill description.

to hostile environments are covered in "Environments* later in this chapter.
Falling In heroic games, characters fall down sooner or later. The amount of damage a falling victim sustains depends on the length of the fall and the result of an Acrobatics-fall skill check. A Dexterity feat check is used

resistance normal to Earth. In vacuum, a falling character would continue to accelerate until impact.
Some falls are less hazardous than others; what a hero lands on can make a big difference in how much damage a fall causes. Apply the following modifiers to the hero's DAMAGE. roll on TABLE P1S: IMPACT
Falls in an environment with an unusually low or high gravity may alter the damage caused. See "Envi-

if the skill is unavailable.

Electricity
The amount of damage a character sustains from an electrical shock depends on the strength of the current and the path it takes through the body.
The victim's Constitution feat check reflects the likelihood of damage, but you can apply modifiers as you see fit. A dripping-wet hero
standing on an iron grate might

The fall categories are: extremely short (3 meters or less); short (3 to 10 meters); medium (11 to 30 meter: long (31 to 60 meters); and terminal (61 meters+).
The amount of time a hero spends falling is short, unless he starts at a very high altitude. Characters accelerate at 10 meters every second, and
there are about 3 seconds in every
phase. Here's a rough guideline for how long it takes a character to hit

have « +3 penalty to his Constitution
feat check: a well-insulated charac-

the ground:

ter wearing rubber gloves and nonferrous tools could gain a -3 bonus.
Electrical shocks may scramble electronic devices such as computers
or radios at your discretion.

LengthofFall Time Falling upto60meters | phase 60-200meters 2 phases 200400 meters 3 phases 400-600 meters 4 phases

ronments" later in this chapter. Armor can't counter fall damage,
but it may negate some or all of the extra damage inflicted by spikes or other nasty devices waiting at the
bottom
Fire Burning buildings, forest fires, vol-
canic eruptions, and other similar
events seem to attract heroes like honey draws flies. Being near a fire isn't healthy; the heat and smoke can rapidly overcome a character, even if he never actually catches fire. It a hero is exposed to direct fire, he sustains severe damage. Check once

Exposure

+20meters add | phase

Fall Modifiers

Characters stranded in the middle of nowhere in bitter cold or blistering heat may experience damage or even death. The rules for exposure

A fall of about 200 meters is long enough for a human to reach terminal velocity--the fastest speed a falling person will travel, given air

Check
Result
Crit. Failure Failure

ImPACT DAMAGE

Severity of R

--

s

M

1e

T

d6+2w d6+2m dB+4m di2+8m

da+2w d4+2m d8+2m di2+6m

daw d4+im d6+2m dB+6m

da.+2s dB+2w d4+2m d6+dm

da-2s d6+2w dB+dw dI2+6w

CON Feat
Check Result Crit. Failure

Heat/'smoke 2db6s *

Flame 3d6w

Failure

2db6s

2d6w

Ordinary

dbs

dbw

Good

das

dbs

Amazing

no damage

no damage

**

resITufrlaetactinhadasircaaoctnteesrfiretohreinofbifrjoeelclotisws ienhxgatsinrogcuaunuisdghsh.etd.fire, this

per round for the fire's effects on
TasLe G16: FIRE DAMAGE. Add bonuses or penalties as you
see fit. Extremely hot fires or chemi cal fires may add a penalty to the
Constitution feat check. Reflective or insulated clothing, such as combat armor, is useful against fire damage, especially if the hero doesn't have to
breathe hot smoke. A hero may up grade his success by one step if using a respirator or independent oxygen supply, and another step if
wearing heatreflective or insulated
clothing. For example, a firefighter in an overcoat and breathing mask suslains only d4s from heat and smoke with a Failure result, or dés

on a Critical Failure. In addition, a character can use his armor's energy
(En) rating to negate some or all of the damage.
A hero can spend an action drop
ping to the ground, wrapping him self in a blanket, or taking similar protective measures to extinguish
the fire. In this case, any successtful result on the Constitution feat check indicates that the fire has been ex tinguished.
Of course, many secondary haz
ards may arise with major fires: burning wreckage, structural col lapse, exploding volatiles, and elec trical shorts are a few of the more common. Heroes carrying anything

Catching Fire

flammable or vulnerable to heat damage may lose their possessions.

<

Poison

P

One of the most common and deadly hazards heroes face is the threat of poison. Many living creatures such
as fish, insects, frogs, snakes, spi ders, jellyfish, and mollusks manu
facture deadly compounds for immobilizing prey or for selfde fense. Heroes might also be exposed to manmade poisons such as nerve SHILSHWINYD
gas, industrial solvents, or riot con trol agents. Poisons are described by NI type, strength, and vector.

Poison Type
Regardless of the origin of the toxin, poisons have one of six basic effects. NOILIY
Hemotoxins attack the blood,
causing unacceptable thinning, clot ting, or interfering with the blood's ability to carry oxygen. An average hemotoxin has an onset time of 10 minutes and an attack duration of 4
hours. Neurotoxins interfere with the
chemical signals of the nervous sys tem, causing the victim''s body to shut down. An average neurotoxin has an onset time of 1 minute and an attack duration of 10 minutes.
Necrotoxins kill or dissolve living tissue in the vicinity of the injury. An average necrotoxin has an onset time of 1 hour and an attack duration
of 12 hours. Caustic agents destroy vulnerable
tissues through chemical burns, and can kill if inhaled. An average caus tic has an onset time of 5 minutes and a duration of 4 hours.
Paralytic venoms immobilize the victim for some period of time. An average venom has an onset time of 1 minute and a duration that de
pends on the victim's Constitution feat check result.
Finally, irritants can briefly inca pacitate a person by inducing naused, coughing and sneezing, or
other unpleasant symptoms. An av erage irritant has an onset time of | round and a duration of 10 minutes after exposure has ended.

Poison Strength

The strength of any particular poison is measured by three characteristics: the bonus or penalty to the victim's

Constitution feat check, the onset

time, and the duration of the attack.

50

--

P

CON Feat

Le

Neura- Necro-

Check Result taxin

toxin toxin Agent

Paralytic

Irritant

G ical

Failure

ACTION

Failure

Ordinary

IN

Good

Amazing

da+2m d6+1m dam

dam

da+im dsw

dB+1w d8+1w d6w

daw

dB+1w daw

dbs

dB+1s das

da+im
Idaw 2daw daw
none

a4 days 644 hours d4 hours
+1 penaity no effect

+3 penalty +2 penalty
+1 penalty no effect no effect

At the the

end ted

of onset time, the victim penalty to all actions, or

begins to suffers the sted damage s paralyzed for the listed duration.

ar

Poison Vectors

Ingestive poisons must be con-

Poison can be delivered by several
GAMEMASTERS different mechanisms. Insinuative
poison is injected into the blood-

sumed. As long as the hero doesn't eat or drink such a substance. it has no effect.

Six Common
Poisons

stream by fangs, stingers, or enven-

Poisons may vary in lethality de-

omed weapons. In order to poison a character with an insinuative ven-

pending on how the posed. For example,

victim is mustard

exgas is

om, a successful attack that inflicts powerful if inhaled, but fairly weak

at least 1 point of primary damage-- if contact is the vector.

after any armor roll--is required. # Example: A snake bites Joe, in-

Poison Effects

flicting 2 wounds of primary dam-

When a character is poisoned by in-

age, and thus | stun of secondary sinuative, inhaled, or contact poi-

damage. Fortunately, Joe's wearing sons, the effects are felt almost

armor that stops all the wound dam- immediately. Ingestive poisons may

age. He takes 1 point of stun damage not be noticed for several hours. Dur-

from the bite, but he isn't poisoned. ing the onset time, the victim feels

Inhaled poisons are gas, dust, or progressively worse. The exact

aerosol mixtures that affect any

symptoms depend on the poison in-

creature that breathes them in. Each volved, but nausea, seizures, blind-

round in which the character re-

ness, numbness, paralysis, bleeding,

mains in an area containing a poi- elevated heart rate, and difficully in

son gas, he must attempt a

breathing are all possible.

Constitution feat check until he ei-

At the end of the onset time, the

ther becomes poisoned or leaves the poison runs its course over the dura-

area. A gas mask, respirator, or

tion of attack. Roll the damage and

sealed suit of armor protects against divide its effects over the duration.

inhaled poisons. If a hero knows

This is when the victim actually suf-

there's poison in the air or antici-

fers any damage the poison inflicts.

pates the attack, he is allowed to

When the attack ends, the hero suf-

hold his breath to avoid taking in

fers no more damage.

poison gas. See "Suffocation" later in

Heroes with the Medical Science--

this chapter.

treatment skill can attempt to aid

Contact poisons inflict their dam- poisoned characters. In the absence

age by making contact with the vic- of a specific antidote, the treatment

tim's skin. The poisoner needs a successful attack roll. Any hit, regardless of the damage inflicted, brings the venom in contact with the target's skin and allows it to do its work. These can be either gases, liquids, or powders. The hero requires a completely sealed suit with a filter mask or independent breathing device to be safe. If a contact poison is
smeared onto a weapon, treat it like
60an insinuative attack.

check provides a -1, -2, or -3 bonus to the victim's Constitution feat check, which may be rerolled after medical attention. If the medic has the specific antidote at hand, the victim may shift the result of his Constitution feat check by two grades. For example, a Critical Failure result becomes an Ordinary success.

Thirst and starvation may be fatal People can live on minimal food for several months, and can survive several weeks with no food at all. Water is much more critical. Going a few days without water can kill. For game purposes, treat the lack of food or water as disease--over the course of time, the victims become ill, extremely ill, and finally terminally ill. They're not really sick, but the penalties described for these stages of dis-

ease are a reasonable description of the effects of dehydration and starvation.
Suffocation
Suffocation can be brought on by any number of causes: exposure to an inert atmosphere, smothering, or strangulation. If a character has pre pared with a deep breath, he can hold his breath for a number of rounds equal to onehalf his Consti tution score. Beginning on the round after a character has passed his limit, the hero must make a Stami naendurance check. Each round, the character continues to make Sta minaendurance checks with a cu
mulative +1 penalty. The result of the check determines
how much stun damage is suffered: Critical Failure: 4 stuns Failure, 3
stuns, Ordinary, 2 stuns Good, 1 stun Amazing, none. Once a charac ter has exhausted all of his or her stun points, unconsciousness usual ly follows. You may allow desperate characters to make a Resolvephysi cal resolve check every round to stay awake. Damage continues to accrue, as wounds instead of stuns.

ENVIRONMENTS
As the planets, moons, and asteroids in Earth's solar system demonstrate, the universe can be a hostile place. An unprotected human would die in minutes--or even seconds--on the surface of any of Earth's neighboring planets or their satellites.
It's natural to assume that heroes adventuring on Earth or Earthlike planets can ignore the physical envi ronment. However, there are a lot of places on Earth where unprotected humans don't belong: inside volca noes, at the bottom of the sea, 10 miles up in the stratosphere, at ei ther of the poles, in Death Valley at noon, or in Wisconsin during winter.
This section examines the impor
tant features of a modern or farfu ture roleplaying environment. Heroes routinely find themselves in
hostile and dangerous settings, risk ing life and limb in places that no sane person would dare to venture. So, how does the world around the heroes affect them?
The rules presented below are here for your benefit. Use them as you see fit. If your campaign pre sents a harshly realistic universe, adjust the effects and damage caused by environmental exposure accordingly. On the other hand, if you run a campaign of super heroes, you may decrease and modify the
rules presented below.
The Endurance
Challenge
Anytime a hero faces the threat of freezing, heat exhaustion, suffoca tion, drowning, or death by the forces of nature, have the player make Sta
minaendurance checks for his hero. This is a special kind of challenge that comes into play anytime a hero is trying to hold up against some
thing that can exhaust or kill him over time.
There are two basic kinds of en durance challenges.
Expaosure Challenge
This first challenge deals with forces that inflict direct harm to a hero-- such as extremes of heat or cold, or mildly poisonous atmospheres. For these challenges, a Staminaen
durance check determines how many points of stun damage the hero suffers while exposed.

Endurance Check Critical Failure Failure Ordinary Good Amazing

Result

4 stun points 3 stun points 2 stun points

B

| stun point

no damage

The interval between checks de

pends on the severity of the environ

ment and the degree of exhaustion.

These intervals can occur as fre quently as once per phase, or as

slow as once per hour. Some expo

sure checks may impose a cumula

SHILSUWINGD

tive step penalty. In this case, the

first exposure check suffers a +1

NI

penalty, the second check suffers a

+2 penalty, the third a +3 penalty, etc.

Once a character runs out of stun

points, he begins to take wound NOILIY
damage at the same rate he sutfered stun damage. Treat these wounds

just like normal injuries. You may

choose to allow a hero who loses all

of his stun points to remain con scious--provided he makes a suc cessful Resolvephysical resolve

check for each time interval.

When a hero runs out of wound

points, he collapses and begins to die. Dying characters must make a Staminaendurance check as per

"Damage" earlier in this damage.

Exhaustion Challenge
Other challenges test how well he roes fight against exhaustion. Some environments, such as an overly thin or thick atmosphere, or heavy gravi
ty, require a hero to make Staminaendurance checks as though participating in a forced march or heavy labor. The result of the check determines any fatigue damage inflicted by the hero's stren uous efforts: Critical Failure, 2 points of fatigue damage Failure, 1 point of fatigue damage any success, no
damage.
The interval between checks de pends on the severity of the environ ment and the degree of exhaustion.
Such intervals may occur as fre quently as once per phase, or as slow as once per hour.
Once a character runs out of fa tigue points, he collapses in a state
of utter exhaustion. He's conscious, but his body simply won't take more abuse. If the hero attempts to forge
on, heedless of his body's limits, he must first deal with the hefty penalty
from the accumulation of fatigue
points. In addition, the character suf E] fers stun damage at the same rate he

suffered fatigue damage while taxing his body in such a way. Don't for-
b get that penalties for fatigue--+1 per point--apply to both Stamina and Resolve skill checks.

Recovery
Heroes can't recover stun points lost

to environmental exposure until they

ACTION

remove themselves from the danger-

IN

ous environment. Similarly, heroes

only recover fatigue points when

they rest. At your discretion, you can

allow a hero to recover all of his lost

stun points when he escapes the

damaging situation, or he automatically recovers at the end of the

scene. You can also rule that a hero

regains stun and fatigue points at

the rates specitied under "Damage"
chapter. GAMEMASTERS
earlier in this

THE GRAPH SYSTEM
Descriptions of unusual environ-
ments appear in the GRAPH classification system. The GRAPH system rates the five primary factors of an environment: gravity (G), radiation (R, atmospheric composition (A) and pressure (P), and heat and cold extremes (H). Each factor is divided into six grades of measurement. For example, a typical environment on Earth could be described as G2/RI/APYH2. This section exam-
ines how these environments affect
the course of the game.

Gravity Surface gravity is determined by a planet's mass and the distance from the surlace of the planet to its center. Dense and massive planets generally have more powerful gravity than worlds lacking in size and mass.
A moderate increase or decrease in gravity is @ nuisance; crushing levels of gravily--or its absence-- are more hazardous.
G0: Zero Gi Absolute weightlessness exists only in artificial environments and those rare points in space where the gravitational effects of stars, planets, moons, and asteroids are in perfect balance. Of course, environments that closely approximate zeto (below 0.2 g) gravity are common.
62 Complicated or abrupt physical activity is difficult in zero g, at least

for those heroes who lack the neces- High gravity imposes a +1 penalty

sary training or tolerance. Charac-
ters who haven't purchased the

to all physical actions, and reduces
the movement and jumping rates of

Acrobatics-zero-g training skill sul-
fer penalties on all actions, since it's
difficult to control movement without
the resistance that gravity provides.
Physical actions and skills that involve motion suffer a +3 penalty.

characters by 25%. In addition, the
fall modifier listed on TaiE G18:
GRAVITY increases the deadliness of
falls. In a G3 environment, a Short fall becomes a Medium fall, and Medium fall becomes a Long fall.

These include Melee and Ranged combat, Movement, Acrobatics, and even the use of some Intelligence skills, such as Technical Sciencerepair.

Finally, the stress of higher gravi-

ty requires an exhaustion check once

every day (see "Exhaustion Chal-

lenge" earlier in
more details).

this

chapter

for

Powered armor helps to offset the

G1: Low Gr:

effects of high gravity. It negates the

While light gravity (0.2 g to 0.8 g) isn't physical action and movement pen-

life-threatening, it's inconvenient for alties of high gravity. A character

someone who isn't used to it, Physi- wearing powered armor receives a

cal actions suffer a +1 penalty. This -2 bonus to all exhaustion checks penalty reflects the difficulty of judg- brought about by a G4 environment. ing actions, and of reacting without `These enhancements have no effect

overreacting, in light gravity.

on increased falling damage.

In addition to inhibiling coordina-

tion, light gravity has obvious effects G4: Very High Gravity on jumps and falls. The movement Unassisted life in an environment

modifier listed on TAsLE G18: GRAVITY with very high gravity (2.0to 4.0 g) is
`provides an increase on any running possible in the short term, but not the

or jumping distance the hero at-

long term. See TABLE G18: GRAVITY for

tains--it's possible to leap a dozen meters or more in low-g situations. The fall modifier reduces the dam-

`more details. The effects are similar to, but more powerful than, the effects of high gravity.

age suffered during a fall in light

Powered armor can't offset the ef-

gravity environments. For example, fects of a G4 environment.

treat a Medium fall in low gravity as

a Short fall. See "Falling" earlier in G5: Super High

this chapter for more details.

Gravity

Humans don't have a biological Many planets may have a much

need for gravity in the short run, but extended stays in very light gravity

higher surface gravity than 40 g, but humans can't colonize them without

aren't healthy. Bones, muscles, and
the cardiovascular system weaken over the course of weeks or months.

permanent gravity-reducing fields or facilities. Anything over 40 g quickly immobilizes those unfortunate

To redlect this, you might decide that enough to encounter such a high de-

@ hero who returns to normal gravity atter an extended stay in low gravity suffers penalties as if he were ina

gree of gravity without protection. Heroes must make Strength feat
checks in order to attempt any move-

G3 environment (except for falling)-- ment or action, and they must also

at least until he reacclimates to nor- make exhaustion checks every

mal gravity.

`minute, You may allow prone or

crawling characters a greater inter-

G2: Moderate Gravity

val between checks--maybe once

Surlace gravity between 08 and 12g every 10 minutes or so. has little effect on characters. At

their extremes, moderate-gravity en-
vironments may produce feelings of awkwardness and unease, but acclimatization is quick, and there are
1o pendlties to actions.

Radiation One of the well-known hazards of space travel is radiation. Of all the ways to die, radiation poisoning

probably evokes the greatest terror.

63: High Gravity G3 environments include gravity from 1210 2.0 g. A surface gravity of

1Its silent, undetectable, and potentially lethal; even if a hero survives the initial exposure, the long-term

20g s about the limit of human tol- health effects are devastating.

erance on an extended basis.

Sources of radiation are many.

Physical
Penalty +3 +1
+1 +3 +5

Movement
Modifier special
+50%
25% 75% 100%

Worlds with a weak or nonexistent magnetic field, such as Mars, con stantly receive radiation bombard
ment. A more dangerous radioactive planet is one that contains lots of particulate radiation--a planet rav aged by nuclear war, or one with an unfortunate mix of volcanic activity and radioactive ores.
For game purposes, only the im mediate and nearimmediate effects of radiation appear below. The risk of contracting leukemia 10 years down the road doesn't come into play in most roleplaying game scenarios.
Radiation exposure has a lot in common with battling through a seri ous illness: The victim may become
mildly ill and pull through in a few days, he could become seriously ill and require weeks to get better, or he could become terminally ill from ra diation sickness. The longer and more intense the exposure, the more likely it is that the hapless character won't survive. At PL 6 and beyond, antiradiation serum can increase a character's chance of survival.
Heroes use Constitution feat checks to resist radiation. TasLE G19: RADIATION shows the penalties and frequency for making Constitution feat checks at each radiation level.
The results of the Constitution feat check are then defined on TABLE G20: Rapiation EFFecTs. Radiation may cause a character to become ill, ex tremely ill, or terminally ill. These ef fects of radiation sickness use the rules presented under "Disease" in the previous section.
Characters atfected by radiation sickness don't succumb immediately.
The onset time describes how long it takes the victim to reach each stage of sickness. For example, a hero who rolls a Failure on his Constitution feat check becomes ill after 1 hour, and extremely ill after 3 hours.

Fall Modifier no falls 1 grade
+1 grade +3 grades +4 grades

Exhaustion Check
1/day 1/hour /minute

Radiation is measured in rems, a unit of measurement that's equiva lent to the biological effect of one roentgen of Xray or gammaray ex posure.
RO: Zero Radiation
Environments with zero radiation, like those with zero gravity, are rare and usually artificial. Controlled and shielded laboratories are the most common sources of zero radia tion environments.
Humans don't need to make en durance checks in RO environ ments--though some alien species requiring background radiation for sustenance or sensory perception may suffer in this environment.
R1: Low Radiation
Low radiation is common to terrestri al planets with a magnetic field.

This field shields Earth--and per haps similar planets--from the worst of stellar radiation. Other minor sources of radiation include heavy metals in the soil and artificial
sources. Low radiation doesn't ex ceed 10 rems over a year.
Low radiation presents no imme diate threat. Heroes and supporting cast members don't need to make Constitution feat checks and can't contract radiation sickness.

B

R2: Moderate
Radiation Moderate radiation, common in space, causes harm to unprotected characters. It doesn't exceed 20 rems
over a single week. Short exposure to the irradiated environment can mini
mize damage. Heroes must make a Constitution feat check for every week (or portion thereof) spent in this
environment.
An esuit, ship hull, or colony dome provides shielding to defend against moderate radiation. Protect ed characters aren't required to make Constitution feat checks.

SHILSHWIWGD NI
NOILJY

R3: High Radiation
High radiation can be found close to stars and on abnormally irradiated sites. High radiation doesn't exceed
100 rads in a single day. Heroes must
make Constitution feat checks for each day (or portion thereof) spent in the environment.

Radiation
Level RO R1 R2 R3 R4 RS

TABLE G19: RADIATION

CON Feat
Check Modifier
no checks
no checks 1 bonus no modifier +1 penalty +3 penalty

Frequency none none T/week Vday 1/hour minute

CON Check
Critical Failure
Failure
Ordinary
Good Amazing

Effects
Terminally ill Extremely ill
m m

Onset
10/20/30 minutes
1/3 hours
6 hours
12 hours

Soft esuits cannot fully protect
»>against high radiation, but allow the equipped hero to make checks as if in an R2 environment. Hard esuits
and space vehicle hulls offer com plete protection.

R4: Extreme Radiation

ACTION Extreme radiation occurs close to powertul stars and on planetary en

IN

vironments that, through natural or

artificial means, have suffered mas

sive radioactive bombardment. Ex

treme radiation doesn`t exceed 500

rems in a single hour. Heroes must

make Constitution feat checks for

every hour (or portion thereof) spent

GAMEMASTERS

in this environment. Esuits provide limited protection
against extreme radiation equipped heroes make Constitution checks as

if in an R3 environment. Space vehi

cles and planetary domes provide complete protection.

RS: Lethal Radiation
Lethal radiation occurs near pulsars and singularities, nuclear impact sites, and rare natural phenomena. Lethal radiation includes radiation
over 500 rems/hour. Heroes must
make Constitution feat checks every minute spent in this environment.
Esuits allow the wearer to make checks as if in an R4 environment. Space vehicles and artificial habi tats of PL 7 and beyond usually pro vide complete protection, although you may rule that characters inside suffer the effects of R2 or R3 environ ments depending on the situation.

Atmospheric Compaosition
An environment might have the right temperature and the right amount of atmosphere, but the wrong chemical makeup can render it completely un inhabitable. Atmosphere comes in one of several basic varieties: inert, which signifies a lack of free oxygen corrosive, which denotes the pres ence of reactive compounds, like sul furic acid or hydrogen chloride and toxic, which signifies a concentra tion of a highly dangerous sub stance, such as cyanide.
AD: Vacuum
Vacuum, or the lack of atmosphere, is more properly a function of pressure.
b The effects of vacuum are described under "P0: Vacuum," below.

Atl: Inert
Inert environments present a very simple obstacle to the heroes--if they want to breathe, they have to bring their own air. You could con sider the depths of a lake to be an
inert atmosphere from a human's
point of view. Any selfcontained breathing apparatus will allow hu mans to survive in Al environments. A vacuum mask fits the bill--al though characters may also use esuits. If heroes run out of air, they suffer damage as described for expo sure challenges, checking onéde per
round with a cumulative +1 penaity.

A2: Maderate
Moderate atmospheres present a mix of oxygen and nitrogen sufficient for humans and humanoid alien spe cies. No precautions are necessary.

A3: Taxic
Toxic atmospheres contain neces
sary elements for respiration, along with poisonous compounds. Heroes must use a respirator mask to filter out the poisonous substances before they can breathe air from the envi ronment. Unprotected characters must make exposure checks once per minute. Extremely poisonous sub stances in an environment may call for checks once every round or phase, or they may impose a penalty on the exposure check.

A4: Corrosive
Corrosive atmospheres not only pre sent an obstacle to respiration, but
also demand physical protection for the entire body. The only way to sur vive in a corrosive atmosphere is to utilize an independent air supply and avoid contact with the atmos phere. A soft esuit will withstand a
corrosive atmosphere for dé days be fore failing. Hard esuits, better de signed to resist the acidic action of
the atmosphere, can last for months or years--it owners perform periodic maintenance.
Once an esuit is compromised, the unprotected hero inside must make exposure checks once every minute with a cumulative +1 penalty.

AS:

Corrosive

Super corrosive atmospheres present

an even more dangerous hazard. Soft esuits dissolve in d6 hours, and

hard esuits last only d6 days. Spe

cially constructed habitat domes, re

lying on PL 7 tield technologies, can resist the atmosphere's effect. Once a hero's suit fails, he must make expo sure checks once every round with a cumulative +1 penalty.
Pressure
Atmospheric pressure refers to the density of the surrounding air. The classic problem, from a science fic tion standpoint, is a vacuum. At the other end of the scale, some planets are smothered in a blanket of gas so dense that it would crush humans. Scientists measure atmospheric pressure in atmospheres (atm). One atm is equal to the air pressure on Earth, at sea level.
PO: Vacuum
The lack of any atmosphere is known as vacuum. The vacuum of interplan etary or interstellar space presents two major problems to an unprotect ed human. First, there's nothing to breathe. Second, the lack of any medium to dissipate or store heat means that an object in sunshine be comes very hot, while one in shadow becomes very cold. In classic SF lit erature, a vacuum represents the cold chill of space. In reality, a vacu um doesn't imply a temperature.
To survive in a vacuum, heroes need sealed respiration systems-- such as a vacuum mask--at the very least. Something that covers exposed skin, such as a jumpsuit or esuit, is also very helptful.
Suffocation and death from shock occur quickly in a vacuum. An unpro tected hero must make exposure checks every phase with a cumula tive +1 penalty.
P1: Very Thin
Very thin atmospheric pressure oc curs on foreign planets, moons, or even very high altitudes on Earth. Very thin atmosphere (0.2 to 0.5 atm) causes serious, but not immediately deadly, problems. People have a hard time getting the oxygen they need from thin air, resulting in alti tude sickness. This malady creates flulike symptoms, but extreme cases may lead to disorientation, paraly sis, or deadly complications.
A respirator mask is sufficient for the task of compressing the atmos phere to acceptable levels. Of course, the independent breathing supply of a vacuum mask or esuit provides full protection. Unprotected

characters must make endurance checks every hour. If a character is suddenly exposed to very thin atmosphere, he may develop altitude sickness. This requires the hero to make a Stamina-endurance check to
resist stun damage. See "Exposure
Challenge" on page 61 for details.
P2: Thin
Thin atmospheres (0.5 to 0.8 atm) present little, if any, danger. The body adapts quickly to conditions which are common to high altitudes on Earth. Respiration may feel difficult, especially if exposure to thin atmosphere occurs suddenly. No endurance checks are required by the thin atmosphere itseli--though characters forced to make Stamina-endurance checks due to exertion or some other reason receive a +2 penalty on those checks.
A respirator mask, vacuum mask, ore-suit nullifies this penalty.
P3: Moderate
Moderate atmospheres (0.8 to 4.0 atm) present no danger to a character. No endurance check is required.
P4: Dense Some environments--alien worlds or deep unexplored mountain valleys-- `may have unusually dense atmospheres. Dense atmospheres (4.0 to 20.0 atm) create breathing difficulties, vascular damage, and eventually seizures. The best protection is a sealed respiratory system; the air isn't thick enough to physically crush orimpede a human from moving around, but it would eventually cause severe health problems.
A hero caught without a respirator must make an endurance check once
every hour. With a respirator mask, the interval between checks increas-
es 10 once every day. E-suits provide complete protection.
P5: Crushing Gas giants and venerian worlds may have atmospheres so incredibly dense that they can physically erush an unprotected human. Crushing atmospheres may exceed hundreds and even thousands of atmospheres
(atms). The only protection against an environment this hostile comes
from a space vehicle. Even the best
environmental suits can't protect a
character in crushing conditions. This atmosphere demands exposure checks once per phase.

Heat and Cold
On Earth, temperatures from -50° C (58 F) to 50° C (125° F) are not unusual in extreme areas. Neither of

- cold, heroes undergoing forced
marches or heavy exertion may suffera +1 or +2 penalty to their exhaus-

tion checks.

B

ttthoheeasnecoueldnxeptrrreometxeectsrteemdisesihmucmammedaiiannt--eclaypalaletchtihotaaultgehHeUrna3tpe:rottToercortiedrdrcihodenrdoietisoncsanthnaonbfertitgeirdtol-

a person in a matter of minutes. On
other worlds, temperatures may range from a hair above absolute zer0 (-273° C) to several thousand degrees.

ones. Torrid environments include areas in the 50° C (125° ) range and foreign environments with temperatures near the boiling point of water. Temperatures up to about 100° C are

HO: Absolute Zera Environments this cold (-200° C and `below) have almost no atmosphere--
most gaseous elements and compounds condense into rain or snow. Hence, independent supplies of oxy-
gen are needed for survival. The
outer planets and moons of Earth's solar system have surface tempera-

He- tolerable for a very short time.

SHILSHWINGD

roes caught near a fire or in the

vicinity of volcanic activity might be NI

exposed to temperatures like this.

Unprotected characters make ex-

posure checks once every minute.

Soft e-suits and specialized firefighting gear can provide partial protec- HOILDY tion, reducing the frequency of

exposure checks to once every 10

tures near absolute zero.
Exposed characters without protection must make exposure checks
every phase. Soft e-suits provide

minutes. Thanks to their temperature control units, hard e-suits provide
complete protection.

only partial protection; they reduce the check frequency to once every `hour. Hard e-suits, given their ability 1o provide heat, offer complete protection.

H4: Super Torrid
`Temperatures over the boiling point
of water, from 100° C to 500° C, demand extreme precautions. Super torrid environments are likely to

M1: Frigid Temperatures of lower than -50° C

occur only on other worlds, or in the
`midst of volcanic eruptions or hot conflagrations.

(-58° F) fall into this category. Temperatures this extreme do not occur commonly on Earth, but polar regions might get this cold, Characters

Unprotected characters make exposure checks once every phase. Soft e-suits and specialized firefighting gear provide only minimal protec-

require breathing apparatus, since
their lungs will freeze upon exposure.
Exposed characters without protection must make exposure checks every round. With extremely heavy, bundled clothing or a makeshit shelter, the frequency of the expo-

tion, reducing the frequency of checks to once every minute. Characters in hard e-suits make exposure checks once every 10 minutes. Vehicles and tailored habitat domes are the only source of permanent and
lasting protection.

sure checks drops to once every hour. HS: Inferno E-suits provide complete protection. Heroes caught near a sun or trapped

H2: Temperate Tempetate environments ill the range between -50° C (-58° F) and 50°C (125° F). Generally, no checks are required for survival in a temperate environment, at least in the short

on extremely hot planets must deal
`with this type of environment. Temperatures may range from 500° C up t0 1000° C and higher. In addition to some form of protection from the
heat, independent breathing apparatus is absolutely necessary; the air is

term.
At both their hot and cold extremes, these environments pose no threat to humans. However, without proper supplies of water, clothing,
and shelter, prolonged contact with
these extremes requires exposure
checks once every hour or day, at your discretion. In extreme hot or

100 hot to breathe. Only shielded vehicles or special-
ized habitat domes offer total safety against inferno environments. Unprotected characters must make exposure checks once every phase with a cumulative +1 penalty. Even hard
65 e-suits can't offer protection against
inferno temperatures.

The ALTERNITY game is skill-based.
Although a hero's profession and Ability Scores are important in determining
strengths and weaknesses, skills are the true indicator of what a hero can do in the game. One Combat Spec loaded with Unarmed Attack skills might be a martial artist or a professional pugilist, but
another could select Armor Operation and
Heavy Weapons for asscrults on the
battlefield of the third millennium. The
selection of skills distinguishes two heroes
with similar Ability Scores and the same
profession as unique individuals.

SKILL

MECHANICS

The core mechanicoverns the use of feats and skills. s circumstances
wartant, the control die may be mod-
lfied by a situation die that m

the roll easier or harder. and the tar
get Ability Score may be modified by he hero's rank in the skill. In the ab

sen

f any other mod

plications, fall back n thes basics

and you can't go wrong

Feat Checks

Sometimes no skill is appropriate to

a situation, and it's logical to use an

Ability such as Strength or Con: tion. The guideline you should use

here is simple: if the-action is an ex-

ample of general use of

lity

and no skill applies, use a feat chack instead of o skill check

For feat checks, roll the control die
s (420) with o bose nation die of +d4. You can modify the sifaation die to
flect the particulars of th tion If the dice roll is equal to

than the character's relevant Ability
chisved

lempts 1o lift heavy weigh

Strength,

thrown objec

Dexterity, resist radiation with Co
stitution, alien salve puzzles with In

telligence, maintain

moral

composure with Will, or establish a

first Impressi hPersonality

Level of Training
Players naturally keep track of the broad and specialty skills that their

heroes possess and try to make game decisions that allow their he1065 ta bring those skills into play. However, an action-filled adventure may present the heroes with situations that they can't anticipate.
Once you have determined what
skill'is appropriate for a given situa-
tion, you can then compare the character's level of training: untrained broad skill, and specialty skill
Untrained 1 the hero has neither the appropriate specialty skill nor the broad skill, he's considered to be untrained. Sometimes it's the weren brawler who has to disarm the bomb. Un trained skill checks are difficult, but a chance of success always exists.
An untrained skill check is always made using the most appropriate broad skill. In the example above, the weren needs to make a Demolitions checkwith a +34 base situation die,
Untrained skill checks are made nst half the hero's Ability Score, ding down if necessary: if the sn has an Intelligence of 11, she
needs a roll of 5 or less to succeed in disarming the bomb.
Broad Skil
lfa hero doesn't have the exact specialty skill in question, he can still fall backon the associated broad
skill. For example, a hero might have invested in Modern Ranged Weap-
s-rifle, but if the only weapon at hand is a pistol, skill ranks in rifle don't help at all. The character has to make the attack using the Modern Ranged Weapons broad skill.
sing a broad skill when a spe-

cialty skill isn't available carri disadvantages. First, the hero can
use skill ranks to incre
score. Broad skills are
fied by skill ranks; the rol broad skill is always made against the appropriate Ability Score
Second, the broad skill situ ation die is +dd, making it one step more difficult than a specialty skill A ifleman has to use his unmodifi Dexterity score with a +d4 nalty to employ a pistol in combat. It's ago weapon, but not nearly as deadly as his rifle would be.

Specialty Ski Having the exact skill ik tion demands is the most favor
condition for both villains and he-
toes. A high Personality score and the Deception broad skill count for
something, but there's no substitute
for the gamble skill. A hero with gamble 4 and a Personality of 12 has askill score of 16,
Specialty skills enjoy another sig-
nificant advantage over broad skills The base situation die for a specialty
skill is a +d0, one step better than the situation die for a broad skill

Prohibited
A few skills are unavailable to any hero who hasn't taken the time and effort to study them. Skills marked in p blue on TABLE P19: SkiLL LisT on ges 64-65 in the Player's Handbooclan't
be used by untrained charact s. For example, while most humans h the Vehicle Operation broad s unless a hero has the space vehicle specialty, he can't even try to pilot a spaceship.

b7

=~You can relax this restriction under certain circumstances. If the untrained character flying the space-

p ship is in constant communication
with a skilled pilot, his friend might be able to talk him through the

process, especially during a routine flight. Or, if the shuttle has a power-

SKILLS

tul artificial intelligence for an on-

board computer, the Al might be able

1o tell the untrained pilot how to switch on the automatic functions

and keep out of serious trouble.

use this methed. In addition, you can use complex skill checks to build suspense and tension, even in circumstances that normally use single checks. For example, an important contest of marksmanship or challenging search may call for multiple successes and multiple rolls.
Complex skill checks demand that a number of successes be achieved to complete the task. Depending on the exact task, multiple actions and skill checks add together over the

» Disaster: Some harmful event related to the action s set off. Important files are erased. alarms are triggered, or equipment is damaged.
» Start Over: The significant mis-
take erases all accumulated successes, and the complex skill check
begins again.
» Vain Effort: The lethal mistake ends the complex skill check in failure, and the action can't be attempt-
ed again until conditions change.

Complex Skill
Checks For many tasks and skills, a single dice roll immediately determines whether or not a character succeeds and the degree of success achieved. When jumping across a chasm, shooting a gun, or noticing the hidden ambusher, success or failure is immediately apparent.
Other tasks that are more complicated or time-consuming use a complex skill check. Some skills, described in both this book and the Players Handbook, automatically
It's Your Game

course of several phases, rounds, hours, days, or even weeks. Skill

Overiooked

checks are rolled normally, and the Skills

results determine the number of successes achieved. An Ordinary result counts as | success. a Good result counts as 2 successes, and an Amazing result counts as 3 successes.
Conditions provide situation die modifiers. Apply bonuses when the situation is in the character's favor,
and penalties when the circum-
stances warrant a more difficult task

The hero sheet is a useful tool for players and Gamemasters. It pro-
vides a listing of every skill the hero
has spent points on, summing up the
character's training and expertise at
aglance. This can be somewhat deceptive, though. Often, players have more options at their disposal than they think they do.

or series of tasks. For example, an
Amazingly difficult situation pro-
vides +3 penalty, but an Amazingly easy situation provides -3 bonus.
Complexity determines the number of successes required to complete the job. Marginal tasks are the

Innate Skills
The first group of skills that players overlook are the hero's innate skills, the species defaults that every char-
acter has. See Table P4 on page 34 in
the Players Handbook.

least complex and Amazing tasks the most complex.

Broad Skills Its also easy to forget the scope of

Three Strikes Rule
Like single checks, complex skill checks allow the possibility of failure. While Ordinary, Good, and
Amazing resulls add a number of successes, a Failure result adds no successes. A Failure result indicates that no progress was made. The character can continue to work on the task during later actions.
If a character rolls three Failure results during a complex skill check,
the attempt is ruined. The task is
simply beyond the character's ability

broad skill. While a hero may purchase the Business broad skill in order to gain knowledge of the corporate specialty skill, the broad skill also provides the ability to use small business or llicit business specialty skills (with a +d4 base situation die). `The broad skill assumes a basic knowledge of each of its specialty skills.
The only specialty skills that can't be duplicated by using the parent broad skill are the prohibited skills, marked in blue in the skill list.

until conditions change--new equipment becomes available, the hero improves his skill rank, or an expert offers assistance. Of course, you can decide that it's impossible to fail, and allow the hero to try again.

Untrained Skills The final batch of skills that most players tend to forget is every other skill on the list. Heroes can try to use a great number of skills at their untrrined scores. A character who

Critical Failure
A roll of 20 on the control die brings trouble to the acting character. Depending on the particulars of the situation, you can assign any of the following outcomes as a result of a
Critical Failure.

knows nothing about repair can still try to fix something--it's just tougher for that hero. Unless a skill is prohibited, any hero can take a shot at it. Here's a short list of some of the more common broad skills heroes might
try to use despite a lack of training
during the course of an adventure:

» Any combat skill (Melee Weap ons, Unarmed Attack, Heavy Weap ons, Ranged Weapons)
» Movement » Survival » Acrobatics » Manipulation » Stealth » Any Intelligencebased broad skill » Investigate » Resolve » Culture » Deception » Leadership
As heroes rise in experience, they acquire a wide variety of skills. The first thing a player does when his hero is confronted with a situation is examine his record sheet to find out which of his skills is appropriate. If the player can come up with a way to make it work and explain it ratio nally to you, let him try.
Skill Rank
Benefits
As characters advance and purchase additional skill ranks, certain skills provide special skill rank benetfits. For many skills, this is simply a bonus applied to skill checks that al lows for a more dramatic increase in the likelihood of success. Skill rank benefits may also apply a bonus to a hero's resistance modifier, as in the

case of Acrobaticsdodge and Knowledgededuce.
A second type of skill rank benefit appears in a few skills, such as Melee Attack and other combat skills Achieving high ranks in one of these skills may allow a hero to make use of the skill in new ways--performing tasks like a double shot. Other ex
amples include cybersurgery, trick riding, and coding new programs.
RPuarnckhasBinegnefitSskill
Usually, a hero acquires a skill rank benefit automatically. When a cer tain skill rank is achieved, the rank benefit is obtained. There is no cost, other than the purchasing the skill rank itself, for the skill rank benefit.
It's also possible to purchase cer tain skill rank benefits before attain ing the skill rank at which the benefits would be automatically at
tained: The procedure and costs for purchasing rank benefits early is de scribed on page 63 in the Player's

Handbook. Typically, this is only pos sible with the second type of rank benefits, as described above--bene fits that allow a new task or action.
Heroes should not be allowed to pur
chase rank benefits marked with a "®)" symbol.
As is the case whenever one of
your players decides to spend skill points, you have the right to concern yourself with how they are spent. If you don't want to allow a rank bene
fit to be purchased in advance, be
sure to inform your players before they begin planning.

=
B
STIAS

STRENGTH FEATS & SKILLS
Strength measures physical power, efficiency, confidence, and re silience. Strength feats measure bursts of raw power, like breaking down a door, resisting something that knocks the hero down, or lifting a heavy object.
Breaking Things
You can simply use your common sense to decide if something would stand up to the punishment the he
roes are dishing out. Or you can
track the damage inflicted by the he roes (see "Property Damage," in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action).
Another option is to allow a hero a Strength feat check to break, smash,
force, or snap an object that a human could reasonably break. If you choose the Strength feat check, refer to TABLE G21: BREAKING OBJECTS and
apply modifiers for both toughness and durability.
Toughness describes how hard it is to damage something, while dura bility is a measure of how much
damage the object can withstand be
fore breaking. Things such as nor mal doors, furniture, instruments, and appliances have Ordinary
toughness heavy, thick, or reinforced

TABLE G21: BREAKING DBIECTS

Toughness

Durabhility
Fragile Average
High

Modifier none
+1
+3

4 objects such as guns, cars, or cash registers have Good toughness; and

Llimb
The Athletics--climb skill can be

exceptionally resistant items such as tanks, vaults, or boulders have Amazing toughness.
# Example: Mad Dog throws him-
SKILLS self through a barroom door. The Gamemaster decides it's an Ordinary object (no modifier) with Average durability (+1 penalty). Mad Dog's player rolls a d20+d6 for his Strength feat check.

used in one of two different ways: It can be used within the action round on a phase-by-phase basis, or it can be used in a challenge scene with a complex skill check.
Within an action round, a hero is entitled to a climb skill check each phase that he climbs. He covers 1,2, or 3 meters in that phase for a Ordi nary, Good, or Amazing result. This

Use common sense when allowing the characters to break things. A

assumes a fast climb, but if the scene's conducted in rounds, the

character might be able fo snap the heros probably moving quickly.

radio antenna off a tank, but he can't

Ii the hero is climbing as part of a

`harm the tank, no matter what he rolls.

challenge scene, don't bother to rack how far he climbs with each skill

Lifting Dbjects A second use of a Strength feat check is to lift or shove something heavy. As a rule, a hero can lift an object weighing up to § times his Strength in kilograms as a Marginal feat (no pendlty), 10 times as a Slight feat (+1 penalty), 15 times as « Moderate feat (+2 penalty), or 20 times as an Ex-

check. Instead, assign a number of successes needed and establish a time frame for how often he can attempt the checks. It's assumed that the hero is climbing continuously throughout the challenge scene. You can assign additional modifiers for the difficulty of the climb, special equipment, or weather conditions.

treme feat (+3 penalty). This is a squat or short hoist of some kind, instead of an over-the-head press. More demanding lifts might be harder: A hero attempling a clean and jerk might suffer an additional +2

Distance Successes Time

1-30m

2 I/minute

30-100 m

4

100-1000m 6

1/5 minutes 1/30 minutes

1000+ m

10+ U/hour

penalty to reflect the difficulty of the lift,
Heavy lifts are taxing. You may re-
quire characters making heavy lifts
1o make fatigue chacks. See Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action.

Distance is the total length of the climb. Successes lists the number of
successes necessary to complete the
climb. Time determines how often climb attempts can be made during the complex skill check.

# Example: A hero is trying to

ArviOR OPERATION

scale a 300-meter cliff. He'll need to make 6 successes, and he's allowed

Generally speaking, untrained char- 1o check once every 30 minutes. With

acters can't do anything strenuous-- two Amazing successes, the hero

including running or jumping--in could reach the top in only an hour,

heavy or powered armor. Noncombat but it's more likely to take him three

skills may still be available to an untrained character wearing heavy armor. For example, wearing plate mail shouldn't prevent a hero from

or four hours to complete the climb. Long climbs are fatiguing; treat
them as forced marches for the purposes of making fatigue checks. See

using Investigate, Resolve, or Life

"Movement" in Chapter 3 Game-

Science, even if the hero has no idea how to wear the armor.

masters in Action. Of course, if it's
not important in the current adven-

ture, then don't worry about it.

ATHLETICS Any feat of leaping, climbing, or throwing falls under this broad skill. Think of an Athletics skill check as a measure of the character's Strength

Remember, a Failure on a climb skill check is not a fall. Its a simple lack of progress. Falls might occur as aresult of a Critical Failure, though. See "Falling" in Chapter 3.

in motion--a test of power and preci- Jump

sion as opposed to the brute force

Atyour discretion, you can assign

implied in a Strength feat.

bonuses or penalties to modify the

hero's check, For instance, a hero with @ good running start (10 meters ot 50) might gain a -1 or -2 bonus to his skill check, while a hero in heavy armor might add his armors action
pendlty as a penalty.
Specific Skill
When a player wants his hero to be a
great racquetball player or soccer star, purchase of a skill devoted to a
single sport is possible. If the hero finds himself trying to do something
that resembles his favorite sport--
such as a baseball player catching a thrown object--you may allow the hero to roll against this skill.
Heavy WEAPONS
While the Heavy Weapons broad skill is intended for use of personal arms, you may allow the hero to use his Heavy Weapons skill with loose`mounted vehicular weapons that are trained and fired directly by the user. A swivel-mounted .50 caliber machine gun on the roof of a tank and recoilless rifle on the back of a jeep are good examples.
1i the weapon employs servomofors or is aimed through an electronic sight, it's part of the vehicle and should be fired using the System Opexation skills.
MEeLEE WEAPONS Several options are available o he10es wielding weapons, including parries, charges, and called shots. See Chapter 3 for more details.
Melee Weapons and its specialty skills may allow the use of certain improvised weapons and dirty tricks.
For example, smashing a bottle over someone's head falls into the calego-
1y of a Melee Weapons-bludgeon attack. Once the bottle is broken, Melee Weapons-blade is probably
more appropriate.
UNARMED ATTACK In addition to the standard attacks to damage an opponent, a hero might
choose to overpower his target. Overpowering attacks restrain, pin, or wrestle the target. See "Overpow-
ering" in Chapter 3.

DEXTERITY FEATS &
SKILLS
Dexterity defines the hero's agility, band-eye coordination, balance, and teaction speed. Feats of Dexterity are used to determine how well the hero performs in general tests of coordination or agility, such as catching a thrown object, handling a piece of extremely delicate work, or suddenly changing direction.

=
B>
STIINS

ACROBATICS

When a hero attempts a vault, acro-

batics training augments athleti-

cism. This means that the player can

choose whether lo use either Athlet-

ics or Acrobatics when attempting a

vertical jump, whichever is better. Of

course, jump is a specialty skill, and

hence uses a +d0 base situation die Daredevil

instead of a +dd.

Under routine conditions, a Failure

1 the hero has the ability to add

result during a daredevil skill check

additional vertical distance because isn't fatal. It's only under hasty, ill-

of several skill ranks in jump, he can prepared, or truly dangerous condi-

still add this bonus distance even if tions that a Failure result could spell

he chooses to make an Acrobatics disaster. Of course, this skill should

check instead of an Athletics--jumpnot replace a hero's survival instinct

skill check

or good sense--going over Niagara

Vaulting and springing requires Falls in a barrel may be possible

some kind of ramp, step, or spring- with preparation, but trying to pad-

board for the hero, For example,

dle a kayak over the edge is fool

dumpster might serve as a spring- ish--the hero probably needs an

board to jump over a fence.

Amazing success.

Acrobatics can also be used to en-

The following text includes uses

tertain. If the hero chooses an acro- of the daredevil specialty skill. Use

batics routine as his method of

the rules for complex skill checks to

entertainment, allow an Acrobatics add tension to important actions. For

check to provide a1, -2, or -3 bonus example, a long hang glider flight or

toan ensuing Entertainment skill

scuba dive might require 6 or more

check. (See the sidebar above on

successes to complele.

"When Skills and Feats Overlap.") > Hang Gliding: On average,

When this skill is used to walk a

hang gliders travel at about 40 to 60

tightrope or perform a similar action, kilometers per hour. Powered hang

acomplex skill check is required. gliders, called ultralights, can reach

The number of successes needed is

speeds of about 100 kph.

tied to the distance involved, and the

Unpowered hang gliders drop 1

prevailing conditions may provide « meter in altitude for each 10 meters

modifier to each skill roll. A balance of forward progress. The pilot can

pole gives -2 bonus, and soft-soled stretch this with a successful skill

shoes with a good gripping surface check; on an Ordinary result, he

add another -1 bonus.

drops 1 per 20 meters; on a Good or

Apply modifiers to take the diffi

Amazing result, he drops 1 meter per

culty of the attempt into account, in

50 meters of level flight. In the right

cluding wind strength, the condition conditions, it's possible to regain al-

and size of the line or wire, and the titude by climbing on updrafts or

slope 1o be negotiated. Navigating a thermals, Ultralights allow continu-

10-cm beam in still air is much easi- ous flight and modest ascents.

er than walking across a 1-cm wire

» Scuba Diving: This skill might

in gusty wind and rain

be used for underwater salvage or

search work, or to stretch the time
that a character can stay on the bot

tom. With standard scuba gear,

deeper dives reduce the time the

hero has on the bottom--it might be

possible to stay down for an hour or

longer at depths of 10 or 20 meters,

but a 100-meter dive might only

allow 10 minutes. Naturally, special
ized or advanced deep-dive equip ment might extend this limit

» Sky Diving: Remember that a Failure result doesn't necessarily in dicate disaster. Under good condi

tions, a Failure result on a normal

jump means that the skydiver lands
badly, sustaining damage as for an

Extremely Short fall (see "Falling" in

the previous chapter); a Critical Fail

ure means that the parachutist suf
fers damage for a Short fall

Some parachute jumps are consid-

ered high-risk jumps. Characters

without the daredevil skill or guid ance from someone with it are con-

sidering to be engaging in high-risk

jumps. Other high-risk jumps include

night jumps, jumping from buildings or cliffs, and low-altitude jumps of 500 meters or less.
In a high-risk jump, a Critical

Failure means that the chute doesn't open, with the expected catastrophic

results--a fall in which the falling object reaches terminal velocity.

In a high-risk situation, a Failure

result on a daredevil skill check in-

flicts damage for a short fall, and an

Ordinary result inflicts damage for an extremely short fall.

1

=~MDefaerntsiivael Arts

In addition to the standard attacks to D> damage an opponent, a hero using
this skill may choose to block or

make other special attacks, includ-

ing knockdowns. See "Melee Com-

bat" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in

SKILLS

Action,

Any hero can use dodge to make
`himself harder to hit, but unless he
has the Acrobatics skill, the attempt
is an untrained skill check.
Until @ hero begins dodging, no defensive effects are gained. For example, & character who dossn't dodge until the Ordinary phase of an action round gains no benefit if targeted by an attack during the Amazing or Good phase. The reaction dodge rank benefit allows dodging
to take effect before the normal re-
sult of an action check, as described
in the Player's Handbook. Normally, using dodge requires an
action, preventing the hero from doing anything else in the phase in
which he makes his dodge skill
check. After 3 ranks in the dodge skill are purchased, the hero can per-
{form a second action in the same phase with a +2 penalty.
Hitting the deck is a special form of dodge. A hero caught in the blast radius of an area-effect weapon is allowed an Acrobatics-dodge skill check to attempt to reduce the damage by one grade (Amazing to Good, Good to Ordinary, or Ordinary to none). For example, if a hero happened to be caught in the Good damage radius of a grenade, successful
dodge skill check reduces the damage to Ordinary.
Fall
While the Acrobatics-fall skill allows characters to improve their chances of a good landing after a fall, not all heroes have this skill When an untrained character falls, he can make a Dexterity feat check.
Complete rules on falling damage and speeds are found in Chapter 3:
Gamemasters in Action.
Flight A hero flying under his own power, such as a sesheyan, might be knocked unconscious while in the
1 air. Naturally, the hapless character `begins falling immediately.

MANIPULATION This skill can be used to disarm simple traps activated by mechanical triggers, like tripwires, pressure plates, or shifting weights. Electric eyes or electronic sensors are coyered by the Security skill, and fuses or bomb mechanisms fall under the Demolitions skill.
Simple traps can be described by the same criteria s a lock. Use the

Prestidigitation This skill can be used for minor feats of contortion or escape, such as getting out of simple bonds, slipping out of handculfs or straitjackets, and similar stunts. Such tasks are significantly more difficult than mere
sleight-of-hand; the hero suffers a +1
pendlty for Good bonds (well-tied ropes) or a +3 penalty for Amazing bonds (a chained straitjacket).

standard modifiers and complexity

ratings for a complex skill check. Of RAansED WEAPONS,

course, the hero must know of the trap's existence before he can disarm

MopERN

it--an Awareness-perception or Investigate-search check is usually necessary to spot the tripwire or hazard before the character sets it off.

Details of using this skill in combat are covered in Chapler 3, under "Ranged Combat."

In addition to disarming simple mechanisms, Manipulation can also be used to rig traps of this sort. The degree of the hero's success in setting the trap governs the quality rating for the next person to come along and disarm it; the complexity de-

RAncED WEAPONS, PRIVUITIVE
Weapons of this sort are susceptible to minor breakage. On a Critical Failure, a bowstring snaps, the

pends on the materials the character weapon misfires and must be

has to work with and the amount of time he spends on .

cleaned, or some other inconvenient
maltunction occurs. See "Weapon

Breakage" in Chapter 3, which also

Lockpick

contains details on use of this skill.

A bobby pin, heavy-gauge wire, or

nail file are the minimal tools necessary to use this skill; the hero has to

STEALTH

have something on his person that

Aplayer with a good plan for dis-

he can fit into the lock. Good tools (-2 tracting an enemy or concealing his

bonus) would include specialized

hero shouldn't be penalized by repet-

tiles, picks, and hooks for picking

itive untrained Stealth checks. Re-

locks. Amazing tools (-3 bonus) in-

ward a quick-thinking player by

clude fiber-optic scopes for viewing giving him an automatic success

the inside of the lock, ultrasonic

when he eams i, instead of allowing

transducers to find tumblers, magmnetic manipulators, X-ray machines,

an unfortunate die roll to ruin his well-thought-out plan.

and similar high-tech gear.

`This skill may be useful in setting up an ambush. If the hiding charac-

Pickpocket

ter attempts an attack before he's

I a character randomly picks anoth- spotted, see "Surprise" in Chapler 3

er's pocket, allow the character to

Gamemasters in Action. The success

find $5 to $60 (5d12) per wallet. It

of the ambusher's Stealth check im-

takes about 10 to 15 minutes to set up areasonable attempt .. . but people notice they've been pickpocketed

poses a penalty on the opponent's
Awareness check to avoid being surprised.

eventually, and a character who practices this trade for too long in

Hide

one place may find irate victims

Background and environment matter

coming back to look for him. Small

greatly in an attempt to hide. Decide

towns or thinly populated areas are

if the circumstances offer Ordinary

especially dangerous; mysterious (-1 bonus), Good (-2 bonus) or Amaz-

strangers are likely to come under

ing (-3 bonus) cover or darkness for

suspicion quickly. Heroes who spend the hiding character. Backgrounds

too much time on the wrong side of

without any cover may apply a +2

the law should be caught.

penalty.

=
B
STIAS

Breaking before entering

Shadow Long-term covert surveillance falls

CoNSTITUTION

under this skill. The same situation bonus described under hide applies tothe shadower's skill checks; it's

FEATS SKILLS

anything more than tread water, The movement rates for swim and easy
swim only apply to characters who

easy to shadow without being seen if lots of cover and background are available. You may ignore the Will tesistance modifier of a shadowed character il the target is distracted.

Constitution feats are used to resist
hazards such as fire, lightning, or poison. The result of a Constitution feat check determines how much damage a character exposed to a

have purchased the swim specialty skill
To administer a swimming contest, you can use the rules for race, above.

Sneak Just as hide can set up @ surpri sit uation, the successful use of the

hazard suffers. For more complete rules and examples of hazards, refer
to "Hazards" in Chapter 3,

Trailblazing
Heroes without this skill suffer penalties to their Stamina-en-

sneak skill can do so, too. See "Sur-

durance checks when traveling in

prise" in Chapter 3

MovEMENT

rough terrain or adverse conditions.

VEHICLE OPERATION In addition to combat driving or piloting, Vehicle Operation is also used for attempting stunts or risky maneuvers outside of combal. Tak-

The Movement skill allow characters
to increase the distance they can
travel in a set amount of time before making Stamina-endurance checks: see "Movement" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action

Successful use of trailblazing can only negate the penalties caused by terrain or adverse conditions; trailblazing cannot provide @ bonus to Stamina-endurance checks.
To administer a contest of overland movement, you can use the

Race

rules for race, above.

ing & car cross-country or landing an One way to administer a race be-

dircraft in o bad storm are examples. tween characters is o use the "Char

Additional information on vehicles, spaceships, and the use of this skill can be found in Chapter 10: Vehicles and Chapter 11: Spaceships.

acter vs. Character" rules in Chapter 3. Allow both sprinters to roll Movement-race skill check; the character with the higher degree of suc-

cess wins the contest.

STAMINA
The Stamina skill has three major
roles in the game: First, it measures
how easily a hero can avoid knock-
out after taking damage; second, it ?3
measures how long a character who

=~has suffered mortal damage survives; third, it allows a hero to push

on through physical exhaustion or

B>

hostile terrain. The effects of damage, exhaus-

tion, and exposure are discussed in

Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action.

SKILLS
SURVIVA
`The most critical concern in survival
is the atmosphere. If the hero has
respiration gear or is in an atmos-
phere that can be tolerated, odds for survival improve measurably.
Discussion of environments is found in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action
You may allow the result of a Survival skill check to apply modifiers to Stamina-endurance checks caused by hazardous environments as follows: Critical Failure, +2 penalty: Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, -1 bonus; Good, -2 bonus; Amazing, -3 bonus.

INTELLIGENCE
FEATS SKILLS
An Intelligence feat check may be
used as a measure of the hero's reasoning ability in abstract situation,
such as assembling a puzzle or solving a maze. The complexity of the puzzle, maze, or leap of reasoning required may add bonuses or penalties to the Intelligence feat check
4 Example: An alien artifact flashes weird lights at Captain Raines in a detailed sequence, changing with each repetition. The player realizes that Captain Raines has to predict the next sequence to solve the riddle. You could draw up a
puzzle for the player to solve, or you
can let the player make an Intelligence feat check for Captain Raines.
Tests of memory and learning

should be rolls against the hero's Knowledge skill. Its a good measurement of how much a hero knows.
Keep an eye out for fields of knowledge that @ hero may have
special expertise in--if you're trying
10 see if the hero knows anything about nuclear reactors, it might be more appropriate (o have the player roll against his character's Physical Science or Technical Science skills instead of Knowledge. If the character doesn't have either of these skills, there's no reason you can't have him roll an untrained skill check against one of these instead of Knowledge.
The list of Intelligence skills in the Player's Handbook can't be considered to be comprehensive of all knowledge that humans and aliens can accumulate. Individual cam`paign settings may demand different skills. Feel free to add new specialty skills to the broad skills listed, and even create new broad skills.
BusINESS This skill performs several functions First, it describes the level of expertise of mercantile and corporate characters. Characters with several ranks in corporate have a good working knowledge of how a corporation operates, and how it can be manipulated. Business can be especially important in campaigns based on operating trade routes or money-making.
In appropriate situations, Busi-
ness is an encounter skill that can be
used just like Interaction. Don't neglect the possibility for roleplaying and interaction between characters. Guidelines for the rewards of buying and selling appear in TAbLE G22: BuyING & SELLING.
Corporate
Large-scale trading and commerce utilize this skill. Here, finance works on a grand scale of mergers, acquisitions, and millions of dollars of as-

sets. Unless a hero has found a significant source of capital, it's impossible to use the corporate skill directly in his own interest; it assumed that the hero's playing with his corporation's money, and exacting only a tiny fraction of the sums involved for his own reward or commission.
Big business moves slowly. lf a hero devotes his time to managing his business fortunes, he may make askill check once per quarter to see how he fared. However, opportunities or deals may come up at any time you desire.

Hlicit business
Trading in illicit goods, contraband,
and black market materials has risks and dangers. The law level (see Chapter 14: Campaign Architecture) of the area may add penalties to the character's attempts to deal under the table. A Critical Failure result is likely to lead to the character's arrest or a violent confrontation with other criminals.
This skill is also useful for fencing stolen property. Since the underworld never pays retail, the degree of success on a Business-illicit business skill check determines how much a character receives for illgolten gains:

Result Critical Failure Marginal Ordinary Good Amazing

Return 5% of value 10% of value 30% of value
50% of value 80% of value

Small Business
The small business skill works like the corporate skill, but it's much more likely for a hero to manipulate personal fortunes with this skill. If he needs to swing $500 or $10,000 transactions lo stay in business, he can do so. Since the character is working with his own money, he can keep

Marginal Ordinary
Good
Amazing

100% + ([d20 x 10%] of cost
100% + (d4 X 10%) of cost
100% - (d8 X 1%) of cast 100% - (d20 X 1%) of cost
100% - (d4 X 10%]) of cast

100% - [d8 X 10%) of cost 100% - (d4 X 10%) of cast
100% + (d8 X 1%] cost
100% + (d20 X 1%) of cost 100% + (d4 X 10%) of cost

= Chapter 10 of the Player's Handbook. skill checks take the place of intelli-

Just how difficull this is, and how

gent play and attention to detail on

long it takes, are largely a function the part of the players.

of your campaign setting. In a set-
ting that's just introducing comput-

oneMoafntywocobmepnuetfeirtsp:roTghreaymeistheprroavdiddeB

ers, it may be a task of months or years as a hero attempts to fashion a

a bonus to the hero's own skill check, or they allow the hero to use the

bug-free piece of software. In a set- computer's skill score in place of his

ling where artificial intelligence is

own

for

any

relevant

skill

For checks.

STIAS

common and computers have been example, a computer with the appro-

azound for centuries, detailing a new priate Science program can provide

code may lake only few minutes. a bonus to skill checks.

DEMOLITIONS

Deduce
This skill can be used to produce a

During a complex skill check, the

theory of what happened when, and

conditions refer to the general tough- why. Using this skill, a character can

ness or resilience of the object to be wrecked. For example, a bank vault is an object of Amazing toughness,

altempt to reconstruct the general sequence of events and positioning of major pieces of a puzzle. In scien-

s0 selting a charge to damage it re- tific matters, the deduce skill allows

every dime he makes with this
skill--or fund every loss.

ceives a +3 penalty. At your discre-
tion, setting charges in dangerous circumstances--such as hanging from the underside of a bridge with your bare hands--might impose fur-

the scientist to come up with a basic theory or observation that fits the facts.
Language

ther penalties on attempts to set

Work with each player to make sure

COMPUTER SCIENCE explosives.

Knowledge-computer operation allows a character to use her computer and its software efficiently. This broad skill and its specialty skills allow a more complete and thorough

When an explosive goes off,it's treated like an area-effect weapon. See "Prepared Explosives" in Chapter 11: Weapons & Armor in the Player's Handbook.

understanding of computer systems

and how to manipulate them.

KNOWLEDGE

Information retrieval is described in Chapter 10: Computers in the Player's Handbook.

Don't allow Knowledge skill checks o replace good roleplaying and clear thinking on the part of your

that she selects a language for her hero. Depending on the nature of your campaign, you may have to provide some information to the players about what languages are available.
It's also up to you to decide exactly how divided the linguistic history of your campaign has become. Do hundreds of languages and dialects exist? Can a hero with knowledge of an ltalian understand ancient scripts
of Latin? Or, in the distant future, has

Hacking
Sensitive systems may have watchdog systems and humen defenders. When a hacker tries to crack the system, electronic warfare may begis Even if a system operator isn't online tocounter the hero, special watchdog programs or attack routines may await the character.

players. Knowledge checks are best used to simulate information that a hero has access to that the player doesn't--often this is information specific to the campaign, its current
events, or its history.
Don't allow Knowledge to replace other skills. If a player wants to know about military tactics of an enemy, it's much more appropriate to

Hardware
This skill reflects a character's skill at computer engineering and hard-

make a Tactics or Culture skill check--even if it's untrained --than it is to make a Knowledge check.

Computer Operation ware design. You may also allow

characters to construct customized hardware for a specific purpose; in this case, the customized hardware provides a1, -2, or -3 bonus, depending on the success of a CompulerScience-hardware skill check.

As long as a character is using a computer for basic tasks--such as accessing free information or using basic software--no skill check is required. For example, even a hero with no computer skills can book a

Praogramming The primary function of this skill is toallow a character to create or modity any of the programs mentioned in

vacation on a computer designed to assemble travel plans. On the other hand, getting a really great fare might require a skill check. Don't let

a universal language taken hold?
Specific Skill Feel free to create new Knowledge specialty skills; examples include cooking, fishing, model building, or science fiction roleplaying. You should consider whether a Knowledge specialty skill you create should instead fall under another skill. For example, the study of drivespace physics might be more appropriate to Physical Science.
`The more specific the field of study, the more information a character should have on the topic. For example, if a character selects world history, it should be more difficult for `him to retain information about the Alamo than for the character who selects United States history or Texas history. Apply bonuses or penalties as you feel appropriate.
75

-

=~Law Your heroes are likely to run afoul of the law from time to time, especially B> i they're not sanctioned by a recog-
nized authority. Remember, the skill can work for law enforcement officers, vigilantes, and even villains.
» Avoiding Arrest: One use of law
SKILLS
enforcement procedures is to persuade law officers on the scene not
to arrest the heroes. The more seri-
ous the crime, the more difficult this task becomes:

manage scientific resources.If the heroes need to know how many redtailed hawks are infected by a mysterious disease, someone with the Life Science skill could design a plan to catch and examine the hawks and monitor existing popula-
tions.
Genetics Genetic study and experimentation
is equipment-intensive. It takes fan-
tastically precise (and expensive) in-
strumentation to perform DNA scans,

Good evidence a1 bonus, and
Amazing evidence a -3 bonus.
In general, here's the type of infor-
`mation that a Medical Science-for-
ensics skill check might yield: Marginal Success: Victim's blood
type, obvious cause of death. Ordinary Success: Indirect cause
of death, identify wounds received before and after death, minor evi-
dence about attacker (size, dress, hair color).
Good Success: Subtle or unexpect-
ed cause of death, identify murder

Crime

Modifier

Minor violation 2 bonus

Misdemeanor none

Nonviolent felony +1 penalty Violentfelony +3 penalty

Heinous felony +5 penally

» Bond Hearings: If a character is anrested, court procedures may help 1o persuade the judge to post a light bail. Modily the hero's situation die
according to the severity of the
crime, and make a skill check:

study chromosomes, or attenipt to
genetically engineer organisms. Otherwise, a geneticist is limited to observing inherited traits and targeting specific characteristics through selective breeding programs.
With Ordinary lab equipment, « scientist can study chromosome patterns, chart DNA, and search for specific genetic markers.
With a Good lab, a geneticist can engineer organisms during their earliest growth stages by inducing spe-

weapon, delailed facts about attacker's appearance or dress.
/Amazing Success: Disguised or de-
liberately altered cause of death, ex-
acting information about attacker's identity.
Psycholagy
`The psychology specialty makes possible the treatment of extraordinary stress and sustained mental injury. It includes a familiarity with hypnosis «and therapeutic techniques. Use a

Success

Bond

cific mutations or improvements.

In.

complex skill check, allowing the

Critical

Incarcerated

short, it becomes possible to create psychologist to generate successes

Failure
Marginal

`without bond
High bail (850,000 or more)

multant characters, The frequency, le-
gality, and morality of this tampering is left to your discretion.

Ordinary ~ Moderate bail (510,000)

With an Amazing lab, a geneticist
can engineer mature organisms, al-

once every week or month as appro-
priate.
Decide if the subject is sutfering from Marginal, Slight, Moderate, or
Extreme mental trauma. The severity

Good

Low bail ($2,000)

Amazing Released on own

tering their genetic structures and
inducing mutations. This is a ex-

of the trauma generally reflects the degree to which the person is inca-

recognizance

tremely debilitating treatment that

pacitated or varies from behavioral

» Custody: Heroes and villains

incapacitates the subject for months
on end. Again, the ethical questions

can use law enforcement procedures are completely up to you.

to convince the local constabulary to

take a person into custody, a handy Xenology

way to make sure that captured villains don't go anywhere.
» Evidence: Characters who can

The more exofic the species, the harder it is to make informed guesses about its physiology or behavior;

justify their interest can use either

acreature that breathes chlorine or

Law specialty skill to obtain access hydrogen should be more difficult to

o official evidence.

study than an oxygen breather,

» Protection: With a successful Apply modifiers as you see fit.

check against either Law specialty

skill, a character can convince the

local authorities to provide police

MEeDICAL SCIENCE

norms. A person with mild claustrophobia has a Marginal trauma, while a ruthless psychotic or hope-
less catatonic is suffering from an Extreme mental affliction. The severity of the illness determines the num-
ber of successes required to effect
successtul treatment. It takes time to work through psy-
chological trauma. At best, a psy-
chologist might be allowed one skill
check per day to deal with minor
problems, but one per week, month, or year for more serious issues.

bodyguards, surveillance, or protection for someone clearly in danger.
» Warrant: Successtul use of either skill can allow a character to get @ warrant to arrest specific individual or search a private area.

Rules for using this skill to treat damage and disease are described in Chapter 3 Gamemasters in Action.
Forensics Evidence gathered at a crime scene

In addition to its obvious uses to
heal wound and mortal damage,
knowledge of this skill allows a character to perform any number of surgical procedures both necessary

can be analyzed with forensics to

and cosmetic.

LiFE SCIENCE In addition to providing knowledge

produce worthwhile information. The quality of the evidence affects the
doctor's forensics skill check; Margin-

Treatment Successtul use of treatment can as-

and information, this skill alsote-

al evidence applies a +2 step penal- sist characters suffering from dis-

i flects the hero's ability to perform ex- ty, Ordinary evidence no bonus, periments, correlate data, and

ease, poison, and radiation exposure; see Chapter 3.

NAvIGATION Under routine conditions, trained navigators don't make skill checks. Its simply a part of the trained navigator's job. Only call for a Navigation skill check when it involves an important aspect of the story or when
an untrained character attempts to
use the skill.
PHYSICAL SCIENCE Ahero with this skill is qualified to design, implement, monitor, and andlyze experiments of various sorts. If the heroes need to find out why a colony's being subjected to ionizing radiation, a physicist can develop a way to deploy sensors and instruments to determine the source and intensity of the radiation. Once analysis is complete, the scientist can probably suggest ways to shield
against or suppress the radiation.
Astronomy, chemistry, physics, and planetology aren't the only specialty skills under Physical Science. Allow the addition of other specialty skills, such as geology or meteorology, as appropriate.
SECURITY Members of your supporting cast can use Security as often as the heroes.
For example, an enemy outpost can
become a major challenge if protectedby a few electronic sensors, robot guns, and a few guards with @ good
security plan.
Protection Protocols
One use of this specialty skill is to secure a person instead of an arec. If abodyguard intends to protect a high-profile celebrity, he can use this skill to coordinate the efforts of a security team, monitor crowds, and scan the planned travel route.
Security Devices
ltems placed by the use of this skill can be circumvented in a number of ways. Physical security devices, such as tripwires or pits, can be by-
passed by the use of Security or Ma-
nipulation, Electronic security devices might be defeated by a character with Security or Computer Science. If the security device involves an explosive of some kind, a hero might also be able to use Demolitions to disarm it.
Use complex skill checks to both

set and bypass security devices. The degree of success achieved by the character who installed the system determines the complexity of by-
passing it. For example, if the origi-
nal installer built an Amazing
security system, anyone who wants. to get around it needs at least 8 suc-
cesses to do the job.
SYSTEM OPERATION System Operation isn't limited to @ single device or platiorm. Whether a character is using radar aboard a yacht, a mass detector on a spaceship, or a hand-held sensor gauntlet,
System Operation-sensors is the ap-
propriate skill. The primary purpose of this skill
is to give each hero an important role during space combat. See Chapter 11: Spaceships. Encourage each player to develop his hero's skill at a
dilferent position, so that everyone can participate.
TACTICS I a player develops a plan that makes sense--such as using cover to approach a bunker, selting up an ambush with support troops, flank-
ing enemies, driving them to the
ground with a couple of grenades in order to cover a charge--allow the
tactical advantage 1o persist as long
as the character would logically have the tactical advantage.
You may allow Tactics to provide a bonus to an ally instead of a penalty to an enemy. For example, if the tactician directs « companion to move to a position from which he can fire on the enemy's flank, it's reasonable to grant the firing character a bonus. In other instances of group
tactical coordination, it may be more
appropriate to apply a bonus to the `heroes' &ction checks.
Tactics is useless if the lactician has no way to convey his insight or if 1o one pays attention to his advice.
TECHNICAL SCIENCE This broad skill is necessary for designing and repairing special equip-
ment, machinery, or instrumentation
for various purposes. For example, a hero might be able to use his Physical Science skill to determine that a
neutrino beam can penetrate the

= alien force field . .. but designing
and building a neutrino stream projector requires Technical Science.
You may allow specialty skills b
other than invention, repair, and
technical knowledge to represent particular areas of study, such as electronics, mechanics, cybernetics,

or robotics.

STINS

Invention
This specialty skill covers the manufacture of parts, tools, or simple devices. For example, a hero might need to make an antenna dish to replace a damaged one, forge a connecting rod to replace a damaged one, or even assemble a working vehicle by bolting an engine to a chassis and rigging some basic controls.

Juryrig
In a combat scene, an item repaired by the use of the juryrig skill usually
remains functional for a number of
rounds. Oulside of combat, juryrig
repairs can last for a number of hours. Allow juryrigged materials to
function as long the story demands.

Repair
Repairing stun damage is a task of Ordinary complexity, requiring only 3 successes. Skill checks to build up these successes can be made once per round.
Repairing wound damage is task of Good complexity, requiring 4
successes. If the wound damage
hasn't exceeded half the total wound
points of the object being repaired,
skill checks to build up these suc-
cesses can be made once per minute. If the wound damage has exceeded half the total wound points of the object being repaired, skill checks to build up these successes can be `made once per hour.
Repairing mortal damage is a task of Amazing complexity, requiring 8 successes plus | additional success for every point of mortal damage. Attempts to repair mortal damage can be made once per day.
For any use of the repair specialty, work must be performed confinuously--a hero is only entitled to a dice roll if he has used the skill exclusively and not performed any other actions during the specified time interval. You don't have to enforce
this rule rigidly: for instance, if hero is just about to finish a full day
f of work on a repair job involving
mortal damage and is forced to inter-

=~rupt his work for a few minutes to deal with an enemy attack, he

shouldn't have to forfeit all the work

B>

he has put in during the day. If an object or system is destroyed

by mortal damage, the hero may

have to use invention or juryrig to

manulacture replacement parts by

SKILLS machining new components or scav-

to end up incarcerated. Permits for Common weapons are considered Ordinary requests; permits for Controlled weapons are Good requests; and permits for Military weapons are Amazing requests. Naturally, a hero with a criminal record has a harder time obtaining weapon permits.

skull. As a rule, heroes notice buildings they might enter, things on fire, and people with unconcealed firearms.
For more information on surprise and modifiers that may affect awareness, see "Detection" and "Surprise"
in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action.

enging similar parts.
Additional characters helping the supervisor of a repair effort can provide bonuses; see "Assisting Actions" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in

Animal Handling
Specific animal types covered by this skill include apes, dogs, dolphins, elephants, horses, and fal-

Intuition
Awareness-intuition represents the hero's chance to avoid surprise from sudden attacks, unexpected encounters, and so on. Use this skill check

Action.
WiLL FeEATs SKILLS
Will feats are uncommon tests of willpower are part of the Resolve skill. There are only a few instances when a Will feat check is the best approach. Tests of character reading, `moral judgment, or emotional stability are examples.
ADMINISTRATION Modern society is full of administrative organizations and procedures, and a hero who knows how to make the wheels turn can be an invaluable asset o the party.
» Equipment Requisition: Heroes with an allegiance to an organization can use this skill to requisition resources. If the heroes want to take

cons. More exotic creatures such as
bears or great cats are usually
trained for entertainment purposes.
Animal Riding No skill checks are necessary unless ahero is doing something unusual. Checks are required when a mounted hero leaps over obstacles, gallops.
over dangerous terrain, or directs the mount in combat. A mount of extraor-
dinary quality might provide a sig-
niticant bonus to riding checks;
Good mounts grant a -2 bonus, and Amazing mounts provide a -3 bonus to the rider's checks.
Horses are described in Chapter 17: Creatures & Aliens, along with a selection of other animals the heroes aze likely to encounter.
Animal Training
You can decide whether a specific animal or alien can be trained. As a general rule, an animal must pos-

when a player doesn't know that his
hero is walking into trouble, but the
hero might pick up some inkling of the approaching danger.
Perception
Awareness-perception reflects a hero's ability lo notice things he might miss on casual observation--a tripwire, an ambush waiting to be sprung, or a clue that's not obvious.
CREATIVITY Creativity and its specialty skills can add color and depth to a character without necessarily coming into heroic use. For example, the holographic illustrator who has become involved in a heroic adventure prob-
ably isnt going to use his Creativity-
`holographic illustration skill very often. Examples of Creativily specialty skills are provided below.

expensive survival gear on their next reconnaissance mission, a timely requisition might be the difference between life and death.
» File Access: Investigators can find interesting information in public
and private records. Real estate

sess rudimentary intelligence in order to be trainable, but sentient or self-aware creatures can't be trained with this skill.
AWARENESS

Hlustration
While primarily used for the creation
of art on a two-dimensional surface, this skill might be used to create
forgeries or fakes, if the character
has an excellent model to work from.

transactions, arrest records, health The Awareness skill governs a hero's

records, building plans, and court

chance of being surprised. It also

transcripts are a few examples.

acts as a measure of the character's

» Logging Claims: A band of he- perceptiveness when there's some10es might strike it rich by discover- thing he might notice without con-

ing a mineral-rich asteroid, a

ducting a thorough search. (If he is

drifting hulk that can be salvaged, or definitely looking for something, he's

alien technology that can be patent- using the Investigate-search skill)

ed. Without legal registration of

Use common sense when consid-

these finds, anyone can take advantage of the heroes' good fortune.

ering if an Awareness check is necessary. If a hero's walking down a

» Passports and Visas: Internation- sidewalk, he might not take notice of

al and interstellar travelers will find passing cars or people who are out

it advisable to obtain passports to
travel abroad and visas to remain in

and about. If he found himseli in the middle of a riot, he'd start paying a

other countries.
78 » Weapon Permits: Carrying an unlicensed handgun is a great way

lot more attention to his surroundings, looking around to see if anyone was thinking about cracking his

A character with this skill can use his knowledge to rig trick shots, de-
tect unusual characteristics in pho-
tographs, and build improvised cameras or darkrooms.
Writing In the absence of a live interview or conversation, a piece of good writing may be able to substitute for the use of an Interaction skill. For example, a Diplomat might be unable to meet with the colony president in person, but if he frames his Interaction-intimidate attempt in @ memo, he can achieve the desired result.
Of course, it's sometimes difficult

to interact as successfully in writing. The result of a Creativitywriting skill check applies a modifier to the associated encounter skill: Critical Failure, +4 penalty Failure, +2 penalty Ordinary no modifier Good, 1 bonus Amazing, 2 bonus.
Investigate
There are three frameworks for the use of the Investigate skill--fast, moderate, and careful.
Fast investigations occur when a
hero gives an area a rapid onceover, trying to spot obvious clues. The hero's not going to find invisible powder burns on the wall, or an im pression left by a pencil on a pad of paper he's cataloging the obvious facts. Is there a body? A murder weapon lying around? Was the door broken down or the window broken?
In scientific investigations, a fast search details the basic facts of the scene or phenomenon. Did the sub ject atfect its physical environment? Did it leave physical evidence be hind? What can be learned from it?
Moderate investigations take more time. Now the hero is looking for every piece of evidence available: dusting for fingerprints, looking for bloodstains or powder burns, check ing to see who had access to the areq, tracking down credit authoriza tions, and rounding up witnesses.
A moderate scientific investiga tion involves detailed analysis of readings on the scene, examinations with sensitive instruments, and seri ous theorizing about the cause of the phenomenon or occurrence.
Careful investigations may take days or weeks. Every piece of evi dence is given a full examination, and every suspect is interrogated or tailed as the circumstances warrant.
Careful scientific investigations may involve experiments designed to confirm theories, precision chart ing, computer modeling, study of the most minute local details, and ex tended observation of the site.
Iinterrogate Ahero targeted by this skill may be required to succeed at a Resolve skill check in order to avoid spilling information. Interrogation takes time {(becoming a complex skill check) if the interrogator wants to check on facts, set up traps, and try to catch the subject in lies.

Search This skill governs any detailed and thorough examination. The system atic nature of a search distinguishes it from the use of Awareness, which covers casual observations.
This skill also governs the collec tion of evidence and clues, which may make subsequent Knowledge deduce efforts easier.
Track Track represents the hunting aspect of Investigation. In fast investiga tions, it allows a hero to follow a physical trail over a short distance for as long as the trail remains read able. In moderate investigations, track is used to check out likely av enues of escape, hiding places, or destinations for the perpetrator. The goal is to establish the whereabouts of a known individual or suspect.
A second use for track is in a care ful investigation. Here, the character begins a systematic search that goes far beyond following footprints. The tracking character can follow credit reports, financial transactions, trans port logs, and witnesses to hunt down his quarry.
RESOLVE
In general, you shouldn't force play ers to roll dice to see what their he roes do. If a player announces that his character is going to throw him self on the grenade to save his bud dies, or that he's not going to break under torture no matter what, no Re solve check is necessary.
On the other hand, you can call for a Resolve check when you think that the player is abusing the realism of the game.
Mental Resolve
This specialty skill assists acts of courage, moral certitude, and will power. Intensive interrogation and emotional pressure should operate against this skill.
Physical Resolve
Many physical resolve checks are not optional. Players whose heroes are trying to recover from unconscious ness or press on through extreme ex haustion can't simply decide that their heroes succeed automatically. This specialty skill is used to recover from knockout and damage.
Any hero can stand up to general

abuse--a roughingup by the vil
lain's thugs and threats against loved ones. However, serious at tempts to break the hero's will call
for Resolve checks. In general, Re solvephysical resolve checks are made once every hour for intense tor
ture, or once every week for torturous circumstances or conditions.

=
B
STIIAS

Street Smart

Street Smart can sometimes be used
to enhance another skill, such as In teraction, Deception, Business, or Stealth. In such a case, the result of the Street Smart skill check applies a modifier to the second skill check: Critical Failure, +2 penalty Failure, no modifier Ordinary, 1 bonus Good, 2 bonus Amazing, 3 bonus.

Criminal Elements
Use of this skill can enhance Investi gate, Deception, or Interaction at tempts against shady characters of a specific criminal group or society.
Street Knowledge
When the hero is dealing in his area of expertise, the street knowledge skill can enhance the use of Investi

-~gate-track and encounter skills such handled with Leadership. swindles as Interaction. You may use this skill and cans belong in Deception.

to provide information to the player. 1f o hero simply asks a friend fora

B>

T the hero keeps his ear to the

favor rather than attempting to per-

ground, you can allow skill checks to suade or manipulate, a Personality

pick up rumors and information. feat check is perhaps the best mea-

sure of success.

TEACH
SKILLS

Afeat check could also be a mea: sure of what a supporting character

Interludes and long periods of travel thinks of a hero who hasn't tried to

are opportunities for heroes to train employ encounter skills on him. How

and practice with one another. For

much loyalty does the ally or the em-

example, if the heroes are traveling ployee feel for the hero? The hero's

through drivespace for five days

own actions should be the primary

with nothing to do, they can read,

gauge, but if the players haten't said

spar, and run computer simulations. much about how they're treating the

Because of this, there is no hard and supporting characters around them,

fast rule about how long it takes to

a Personality feat check is a reason-

teach someone: use your best judg- able way to find out what kind of im-

ment, but generally don't allow a

pression they've left.

hero to gain more than one skill rank There's no definite way to mea-

per adventure in this fashion.

sure just how lucky @ hero is, but

Remember, the cost of a skill can't Personality feat check is a close ap-

be reduced below 1.

proximation. On occasions when you

don't know if the villain drops a rope

PERSONALITY

off the cliff where a hero desperately clings tolife, allow the hero a Per-

FEATS

sonality feat check to see if the rope `happens to land nearby.

SKILLS

Personality feats are moderately uncommon. Skills exist to handle most
forms of interaction between charac-
ters. General dealing with people
uses Interaction, tests of etiquette
and breeding fall under Culture, fiery and impassioned speeches are

CULTURE Like Street Smart, Culture can be used lo enhance a primary skill such as Interaction or Business. For example, a hero about to use the Bu: ness skill to set up a trade deal with an alien colony might take advan-

Personality Skills vs. Heroes

tage of knowledge of that colony's culture.
DECEPTION
Some frauds take @ while to develop.
A hero who wants to create a slowmoving swindle by visiting a mark several times a week for a month, baiting the hook, building trust, and setting up the take could use a complex skill check to build the swindle.
Biluff
The use of bluff can include attempts to assume someone's identity or pose as another person for a while.
Bribe
`The size of the bribe offered may help the initial attempt to succeed. The going rate for bribes varies widely according to situation, but a guideline appears below.
Bribe Examples $100 Low risk, minor infraction $500 Low risk. ordinary infraction $2,000 High risk, serious infraction
$10,000 Grave risk, deadly infraction
Risk is the risk to the person receiving the bribe. The infraction is a measure of what it is that the hero is asking the recipient to do or allow lo happen. High-profile individuals tend to require hefty bribes.
Gamble
Each purchase of this specialty skill indicates knowledge of a single game or type of game; it's up to you whether 1o allow a skill to be as broad as card games or as narrow as stud poker.
If o hero attempts to augment his personal fortune through repetitive wagering and gambling, it's okay to reduce the efforts of a day or a week toa single skill check.

NTERTAINMENT
The Entertainment skill can provide a source of income or may find un-
usual use in some circumstances.
(For instance, the act specialty may be used in conjunction with an attempt at Deception.) The amount of money the hero eams depends on the quality of his performance and the general circumstances of his audience. & large audience of wealthy people might provide an actor with

thousands of dollars, while a hand-
ful of passersby in an empty part of town might provide a mere 2420 dol lars during an evening.

INTERACTION
The Interaction broad skill s the primary device used to measure the success of character communication. Whenever the hero tries to talk someone into doing something, this skill comes into play.
Remember to include the target's Will esistance modifier and any attitude modifiers from TaBLE P25: EN the counTeR SkiLL EFFECTS (page 96 in Player's Handbook). Its much easier tostrike a bargain with a Charmed
merchant than a Hostile one.

Bargain
The use of the bargain skill deter-
mines the outcome of « negotiation when both parties are inclined to cooperate. Unless you have specific in-
formation in mind, use the
guidelines presented for the Busi ness skill to determine the costs of buying and selling goods or services,

Charm The charm skill s effective when used before employing another Interaction skill. Charm can alter a targets attitude, thus providing @ bonus to later interactions. For example. warming up a Neutral merchant makes the ensuing bargain attempt much more likely to succeed.
Interview This skill is kinder, more sympathetic method of interrogation. It typically involves the use of flattery and charm rather than the threat of bodi Iy harm. Add modifiers to the skill check to reflect the circumstances at
hand.
Intimidate
Feel free to add modifiers to the intimidate skill check to reflect the cir
cumstances at hand. A marine
canrying @ plasma cannon is more
intimidating than a punk with a
knife. However, that marine is not
particularly scary when he's trying to lace down a tank. Successful use of intimidate usually has the side effect of driving the subject's attitude down one category--Friendly to Neutral,
Neutral to Hostile, etc.

Entertainment skills in action

Seduce Some situations are clearly inappro priate for romantic overtures; apply
modifiers to a seduce skill check as
you feel appropriate. You should use your judgment re-
garding this skill. There's probably
no need, to narrate a seduction at-
tempt in clinical detail. Roll the skill check, fade out, and move on to the next scene.
Taunt Rather than force your players to bellow obscenities and insult after in-
sult, it's permissible to allow a taunt
skill check and let the result deter-
mine the effect.

LEADERSHI
Use of this skill can confer bonuses
that apply over the course of a complex skill check or a situation that is measured over hours, days, or weeks. For example, a successful Leadership skill check a can provide bonus during a forced march, a cre
ative or scientific endeavor, or the or-
ganization of a voting drive. In addition to conferring bonuses
1o individuals involved in carrying
out a plan, Leadership takes the
place of the Interaction broad skill when a hero is dealing with large numbers of people. When a hero
whips a mob into a frenzy, rallies
troops retreating in disorder, or com
mands an entire security detachment, Leadership is the appropriate H'l skill.

Perks and flaws offer special

benefits or bonus skill points for

good character concepts. Each perk and flaw provides one extra

handle for a skilled player to use

in bringing his character to life.

No one remembers the Combat

Specialist who plunges into

battle--that's what Combat

"

Specs are for. But everyone

s4

SELECTING PERKS &

powerful perks--you might actually be wandering into character abili ties better covered under the psion-
ech, or mutant rules. Take at your new perk as if you were putting together a character. If you would select it without hesita tion because it so med to be the most desirable perk available, it
might be a little too good.
pply for flaws.
houldn't give more than
@ +2 penalty t> one type of ˘heck or skill on o permanent basis. Remem
ber, if your players pick the flaw be-
cause it doesn't hurt them, you're giving them free skill points--and if
they never choose the flaw, then you
wasted your time designing it in Keep mind when designing
both flaws and perks that the point
of th siit system fsn't to make characters more powertul, but to make them unigus and more inter
sting to play. A well-designed perk one that adds distinctiveness to a character's concept
Acquiring New Perks A hero may decide to purchase a new perk as an achievement benefit when he reaches o high enough level: No matter how many points the character has available, the limitation of thres perks still applies. If a hero begins play with three perks, it becomes impossible to acquire another later
On rare occasions, you may assign & new perk to a hero to reward
ceptional roleplaying or raflect developments in the game. A hero might o quire Reputation o become a Calabrity through the growth

of the campaign and his own suc-
cesses, See Chapter & Achievements
for more information.
Getting Rid of Flaws Buying off an old flaw is another available achievement benef When a flaw is eliminated in this manner, the hero retains any bonus skill points received during character generation.
You may also strike «flaw fro hero if you feel that it isn't being.
roleplayed properly. For example, if a Dirt Poor hero suddenly becomes wealthy in the company of all his Filthy Rich iriends, and the player doesn't want to continue playing this flaw, you can just say that the hero lost his flaw. However, when you do this, you should withhold achievement points to make up for the fact that the hero just got a break. See Chapter 8: Achievements for details on withholding achievement points.
PERKS & FLAWS IN PLAY
While many of the listed perks and flaws are self-explanatory, you may need to exercise some judgment and initiative in order to make others work for you. The first step is to remember that perks and flaws are part of a hero. I you never have
player roll o flaw check for his hero's
Temper, the flaw might as well not
exist. One good technique is to note
one situation per adventure in which a hero's perkeor flaw might come up.
For instance, you might decide that a Ha

particular supporting character is likely to be impressed by a hero with Great Looks, or repelled by hero with Poor Looks. Plan this ahead of time and keep it with your notes for the adventure.
Perk and Flaw
Mechanics
Perks fall into two general types: active and conscious. Active perks don't require skill checks or feat checks: they provide a permanent modifier or benefit. For example, Ambidextrous and Heightened Ability provide benefits anytime the right situation applies.
Conscious perks only come into play when a hero makes a determined attempt 1o bring his perk to bear. Conscious perks generally re-
quire a perk check, which operates like a feat check (+d4 base situation die) using the hero's appropriate Ability Score. For example, since Concentration is conscious Intelligence-based perk, a hero must make a check against his Intelligence score with a +d4 situation die in order to bring it into play.
You can assign modifiers to the use of a conscious perk, especially if the hero is trying it in an appropriate or inappropriate situation. For example, trying to use Celebrity on a backwater world might inflict a +3 or +4 penalty to the hero's perk check.
All flaws are considered active. Some flaws have no effect until triggered; for example, a hero with a
Phobia suffers no effects until he is

confronted by whatever he is afraid of.
1t you have a number of heroes in the game with flaws that must be triggered, jot down a reminder in order to keep track of which heroes' flaws are likely o turn up. It would be a shame if you lorgot to take advantage of that hero's Phobia in a crucial spot of the adventure!

spies, and agents who hear word of an alien artifact may take extreme measures to acquire it.
This perk is unique since it manifests in a single physical device. Because the player has invested skill points in this perk, you should exercise caution in stripping the artifact away. Unless a hero has demonstraled obvious lack of wil, allow him an
opportunity to recover a lost artifact,

PERKS
If any perk doesn't fit your cqmpaign or provides an ability that you don't want heroes to have, you may disallow it. Work with a player to devise a perk suitable for both his hero and your story.
Alien Artifact An alien artifact can be either a perk ora flaw, depending on whether the benefits it provides are worth the headaches it entails. If one of your players chooses this perk, create a suitable artifact using the rules in Chapter 12: Alien Artifacts.
Another option is to ask the player what the artifact is and what it does, and then modify his suggestions to make the artifact match the power level, flavor, and background of your campaign. Of course, you can add powers or dangers the hero doesn't suspect.
Typically, the biggest threat posed by an alien artifact is the rarity and value of the device. Crime lords, treasure hunters, unscrupulous politicians, ambitious administrators,

Ambidextrous This perk is useful for fighting with a weapon in each hand. Obviously, weapons such as rifles and quarterstaves can't be used in one hand, even if the hero has this perk.
Animal Friend It's likely that violent animals will naturally choose to altack individuals other than the character with this perk, given multiple targets.
Celeb While this perk is not a guarantee of limitless wealth and endless support, it can prove useful. Celebrities can gain access to closed doors, impress local officials, and generally get their way. One common use of this perk is to get things for free, such as dinners at fine restaurants, lodging for a few days, or passes to special events. Naturally, the celebrity should define why he's famous. Entertainers, sports stars, media personalities, war heroes, politicians, businessmen, and scientists are some common types of celebrities.

Concentration At your discretion, the bonus for using the Concentration perk may last throughout a scene of continuous single skill checks or a complex skill check. For instance, a rock climber might gain the Concentration bonus throughout his ensuing climb, even if it lasts for hours. Of course, if he takes a break or gets distracted, he'll have to make another successtul perk check or finish the climb without the bonus.

Danger Sense
You may allow a hero with Danger Sense to make an Awareness check you wouldn't normally allow another character. For example, if a hero is being stalked by an assassin using the Stealth skill, you might give him
a last-minute Awareness-intuition
check to detect the coming attack

Faith

1o once per scene, but now and then

Keep an eye out to see if the player it might be a way to cut a heroa

roleplays this perk accurately--this break.

is your best guideline to determine if

the hero is demonstrating Faith or

Great Looks

not. & hero who displays skepticism, Great Looks impacts people of both

despair, or sarcasm probably isn't

sexes. It's not all about sex appeal--

counting on his Faith to sustain him. it's about charisma, presentation,

Feel free to temporarily withdraw the perk's benefits until the hero's

confidence, and other intangible factors. Generally, the perk's benefis

Faith returns. Just how the hero demonstrates such a return--prayer, a religious retreat, or penance--is up to youand the player to decide

are lost in hostile situations or when
dealing with members of other species. Heightened Ability

Filthy Rich

`This perk presents the opportunity

This can be a dangerous perk if you letit get out of hand; heroes with this perk should be watched carefully. It's

for a player to trade some of a hero's skill points for one or more higher Ability Scores. The result is a charac-

best to consider the hero as having a limited cash fund available--an allocation of funds renewed every

ter with better innate characteristics,
but without as much variety in his skills.

month, quarter, or year. Of course,

the hero may have millions socked Observant

away in banks, sunk into invest-

The direct effect of the perk is to add

ments, or balanced against debts of a-1 bonus to Awareness-perception

asimilar magnitude.

checks. At your discretion, this perk

Don't let a Filthy Rich hero buy whatever he wants whenever he

may apply its bonus to Investigate-- search or track attempts, Deception

wants. Vehicles and high-powered gamble skill checks, and other skills

weapons and armor shouldn't be

in which attention to detail might

handed out easily. Even if the hero

play a part

has thousands of dollars to blow, he stll has to find someone with a spare starship to sell or an illegal plasma gun in the back of the store. Let Filthy Rich heroes live it up when

Photo Memory Obviously, if a player remembers the details of a situation, it is generally assumed that the hero recalls the in-

their actions don't directly affect the formation, too.

story--renting the finest hotel rooms, eating in the best restaurants, or
buying equipment that has an extra
cosmetic appeal.

Powerful Ally After selecting this perk for his hero, the player should work with you to determine exactly who the ally is,

Fists of Iron

where the ally is located, and why

Normally, Fists of Iron is an active perki it provides a L-point increase to damage all the time with a successful perk check. The improved, more expensive version of the perk is actually a conscious perk, activated by a perk check against Strength.

the ally is willing to help the hero from time to time. Be sure to review the player's suggestions carefully and make sure that the Powerful Ally fits your campaign. It's reasonable for you to insist that the player pick out situations in which his ally just can't hélp out; for example, gelting

Fortitude
The primary purpose of this perk is togive the hero an edge in resisting exhaustion and knockout.

an old homeworld mentor to help out in a problem on the other side of the galaxy might involve a +3 or +4 penalty to the perk check. Moreover,

Good Luck You may allow the hero to use this perk for desperation rolls, when you have no idea what else might apply. Does the canister of poison break open or remain intact? Make a Good Luck check. Use of the perk is limited

the ally can't instantly appear in times of need. The hero has to have a way to call for help when he wants his ally to respond.
Tf the ally does come through for the hero, you have control over what kind of aid the ally provides. He or she might come lo the rescue with

guns blazing, or might use influence

1

< to send local forces to the hero's aid. Help might be in the form of money, information, legal assistance, or

P even a couple of thugs to act as muscle. Allies are people, too; a hero can

wear out his welcome by abusing his
perk or not showing proper amount

of appreciation and gratitude.

FLAWS

You can exploit the perk as an av-

enue for adventure. Someday the
&
hero's ally may be in trouble, and it's

likely that if the hero doesn't re-

spond, the benefits of the perk will

disappear.

PERKS
Psionic Awareness
The range of this power is about 10

meters, so the hero must be the tar-

get of the psionic powers or be

standing close to someone who is.

Build tension by rolling dice secretly. I you really want to torment your players with parancid delusions,

throw the dice for no reason and ask

a question such as "Dave, your hero

is psionically aware, isn't he?"

Reflexes
This is a defensive perk that makes it more difficult to strike the hero in combat. In contests of pure reaction time, apply a2 bonus to the hero's perk check.

Reputation
The power of Reputation is strong.
but defies perfect definition. The subjectivity of this perk allows for the possibility that someone may or
may not be impressed with the hero. For example, the hero's bonus to
Will-based skills may not apply when she finds herself a long way
from traditional stomping grounds.
Ask the player what the hero did to eamn a Reputation, and whom it's
likely to impress. While this perk
normally applies to Will-based skills that involve social situations (Ad-
ministration, Investigate, and Street
Smart, primarily), you could also
allow the perk's bonus to apply to skills such as Business or Deception.
Tough as Nails The hero is resistant to attacks that depend on Strength--Melee Weapons and Unarmed Attack. He's harder to hit and to hurt, shrugging off blows that might cripple others.

Vigor
The hero doesn't have to purchase an
86extra stun point in order to get an extra wound point. If the hero's dura-

bility rating is 8 stun, 8 wound, and 4 mortal, that's perfectly all right.
Willpower
This perk is useful for resisting men-
tal attacks and Personality skills
that operale against Will. In addition, if your campaign uses Mindwalkers, the perk assists heroes who are forced to resist mental attacks.
FLAws
Keep an eye open for flaws that players don't regard as flaws. For exam-
ple. players who select the Temper
flaw may figure that even if their
hero flies into a rage, he'll be the toughest guy around. Other heroes may try to use Infamy or a Code of
Honor to their advantage in social situations. If you choose to allow the flaw, it's your job to make sure that the flaw occasionally impairs the hero in important situations.
Alien Artifact
Refer to Chapter 12: Alien Artifacts
for details on designing alien arti-
facts and selecting powers. When an
alien artifact is selected as a flaw, it's best not to choose a hand-carried item--if such an item is detrimental 1o the hero, it's harder to rationalize
why he doesn't just throw it away. [f your player is up to a roleplaying challenge, the hero may have a steadfast belief that the flawed arti-
fact is the boon of his existence.
Bad Luck While Bad Luck may not appear too detrimental at first glance, it is devastating flaw. The hero with this flaw suffers a terrible mishap in 1 out of 10 heroic tests. You can use Bad Luck as an excuse for slowing the heroes down when they're sailing through an adventure too easily. It doesn't have to affect the unlucky hero alone--it he's driving and gets
caught at a train crossing, everyone
is slowed down by his misfortune. To be fair the flaw shouldn't be used in this fashion more than once per scene.
Clueless
A hero with this flaw requires a little special handling on your part. Unless the player is flawless roleplayer, you want the player behind the Clueless hero to have no idea what his hero is clueless about. Have

the player mark three or four skills as his potential Clueless areas, then select one as his real weakness. Anytime the player needs to roll a skill check against any of those three or four skills, you roll the skill check for him in secret. Apply the Clueless moditier if the skill being used is actually the flawed one.
1i the player is honest and a very good roleplayer, you can save some time by letting him know which skill he has trouble with. You have fo trust the player to use the skill whenever his hero would give it a try, feigning ignorance of a character weakness.
Clum: `This flaw alfects all Dexterity feat checks and Dexterity-based skills. The list of affected skills includes heroic abilities such as the Modern Ranged Weapons broad skill. It's probably a bad idea to let this fellow drive.
Code of Honor
While many heroic characters have
acode or ethos to follow, a hero with this flaw must find that his code occasionally limits his options. Encourage the player to do some of the legwork and draw up a list of five or six major points that the hero feels strongly about, and the way he expects to react in those situations. A typical heroic Code of Honor might involve avoiding the use of lethal force, defending innocents no matter
what, always offering the villains a chance o surrender, and never turn-
ing one's back on people in need. When the player has worked out
his hero's Code of Honor, make sure
that it presents some clear restric-
tions for the character. Now and
then, you should set up situations in which the expedient, sensible course of action just doesnt square with the hero's code--an ethical system that's never challenged isn't a flaw. If a character fails to live up to his own code, reduce his achievement point reward for the adventure.
Delicate
In addition to successful Unarmed Attacks, other taxing activities might trigger this flaw, such as working in the salt mines or trying to dig someone out from under a pile of rubble.
Dirt Poor
A hero with this flaw is penalized in
starting funds, but you should make

certain that this flaw doesn't disap-
poar after one or two successful ad-
ventures. Even if the Dirt Poor hero finds the villain's cashbox and pockefs thousands of dollars, he'll have a

Oblivious Penalties may also apply to Investi
gate-search or track skill checks, if
you think the hero's lack of percep-
tiveness might play a role.

< plaining who he is. why he hates the
horo, and how ho's likely to make tho

hero's life miserable.

up

Minor enemies are likely o show more often than heavyweights,

p

hard time holding on to it. Bill collec-

but they don't pose as much of a

tors show up at the door, a villain slaps a lawsuit on the hero, a mes-

Obsessed Let the player define a particular be-

threat. Truly powerful enemies might remain behind the scenes, manipu-

sage appears from home that a cous- havior or situation that the hero can't lating the hero's life. Don't involve Stdd

inneeds an expensive operation

resist, and then approve or modify

the enemy in every adventure, but 3

youget the idea. The Player's Hand- his suggestions. Here are some

book suggests that the hero might

ideas: An uncontrollable romantic

allow his presence to be felt at least once every two or three adventures,

owe a lot of money to some faceless might be distracted by every attrac- even if enly o be a nuisance. Ene-

supporting character; this is an ex-
cellent way lo keep the character Dirt Poor for a long time to come.

tive character and villain; an obses-
sive gambler might be tempted to join any game of chance; a butterfly

mies don't have to go after the hero
personally; they can send in bounty SMy14 hunters or assassins, relay informa-

Once the character has eliminatedthe flaw by paying skill points,

collector might be distracted by unusual specimens in the wild. If the

tion about the hero's whereabouts to the authorities, take legal action

the debt collectors and financial

trigger is rare. decrease the skill

against him and his property, or

drains will fode into the background. point bonus (a 6-point flaw becomes even go after the hero's iriends and

Forgetful

a4-point flaw, for instance) to reflect family. the small chance of seeing it in play.

Like Clumsy, this is a formidable

Primitive

flaw for a hero to canry around in a

0id Injury

Encourage the player to reflect this

modern setting. If a player with a

While this flaw is more common to

flaw in the hero's skill selection. A

Forgetiul hero ever asks to be re-

characters whose concept resembles primitive character with Vehicle Op-

minded of the name of a supporting a grizzled veteran, any character

eration-space vehicle doesn't feel

character, an access code, or a meel-
ing place, smile at him and say, "I

uld suffer the lasting effects of an injury from childhood or the recent

`primitive at all. Modern technology can be defined as anything of a

quess your hero forgot."

past. The flaw might be triggered `higher Progress Level than the hero's

any time the hero falls; when he is

home society.

Fragile

caught in the radius of an area-effect

This flaw doesn't make a hero more

weapon; when his attacker rolls the Slaw

likely to be hurt, but can create big

highest possible result on a damage `This flaw indicates an inability to

problems for someone with fatigue roll; when he rolls a Critical Failure react quickly in moments of stress,

ormortal damage--the chance of his on an attack: or when he rolls a Criti- not a mental weakness. In actions

sulfering additional damage is high- cal Failure on his action check.

that are contests of pure reaction

erthan if he didn't have the flaw.

time, this flaw may give a +2 pendlty.

Infamy The player should define the event orsituation that made his hero infa-

Phaobia The player must define what his
hero is afraid of--and consider why the hero has this fear. You should

mous, as well as an area or circle in

make sure that the hero doesn't de-

which his Infamy is likely to mani- fine this too strictly; it's better to

fest. For example, a player might decide that his hero is known as a

have a phobia of all insects instead of carpenter ants or glowbugs. If

notorious thief on a certain planet.

phobia seems like one that won't

Elsewhere, its less likely that his In- come up very often, you can reduce

famy will prove relevant--but on this the skill point bonus for this flaw.

planet he's got a tough time dealing

with law enforcement. Moreover, it's Poor Looks possible that the hero was unjustly Refer td the discussion of the Great

accused, framed, or is otherwise un- Looks perk; this flaw can affect the

deserving of Infamy. With efforts to

hero even when he or she isn't deal-

tedoem himself or prove himsell in- ing with the opposite sex.

nocent (and an expenditure of skill

points), the flaw might fade.

Powerful Enemy

In limited circumstances, you

Powerful enemies seem to shadow

`might allow the Infamy modifier to

heroes in every epic tale; this flaw

pidraotveidceheacbkos,neusspetociIanllyterifatchteiohenro-iinstim-pwrhoivcihdetos

you with material around build stories and adven-

notorious for ruthless or violent behavior. Don't allow a hero to get more

tures. When the character is created, ask the player to sketch out initial

benefits than penalties out of a char- facts about the hero's nemesis, ex-

acter flaw.

Spineless
You may apply a +1, +2, or +3 penalty to the character's Resolve-mental resolve skill checks when issues of character or courage come into play.
Temper
`You may decide to eliminate the
penalty if the player chooses actions that an enraged hero would naturally attempt. For example, @ hero might not suffer the penalty in combat against the people who enraged him, but he wouldn't fight smart. He'd keep pounding on downed ene`mies instead of dealing with new ones, run through obstacles instead
of around them, and refuse to retreat.
Bad-tempered heroes might also take out their frustration on neatby equipment or properly, if there's nothing they can atlack otherwise. Heaving an unresponsive computer out the window is every bit as appro-
B priate as leaping to pound a smart-
mouthed enemy into the ground.

OnisiefitheGamemaster's rewdiids
is the opportiisity to create and portray fnl-glmuupgonmg
Sicting with supporting characlersisoften the focus of entire adgefitures, and
always part of the'#tory. Realistic motivations, appropfiate game stats, and believable persondlities are all components of a supporting character.
You decide how and what one of these characters says or does when heroes associate with them--and * what they`re doing behind the scenes when the heroes aren't around. When the heroes foil the plan to kidnap the government minister. does the villain feign surrender? Does he retreat and gather his forces? Does he fly into &
an insane rage? Speaking through#=
a supporting character, you can deceive the heroes, offer suggestions, issue threats, or jump in with a helping hand,

D@
SIS |
teacher, eic,). Everyday folks and
even the average thugs and gangsters aren't quite as capable as beginning heroes, These characters, however, may have substantial number of skills from the profession lists and perform jobs that you might find professionals doing. In other
words, not every person in a military
uniform is a Combat Spec--many low-ranking soldiers and junior officers don't have any profession at all.
Of the characters who populate a typical campaign setting, 60 to 80
cent are nonprofessionals. If the jority.of characters in setting e heroic in naturs, it would be
The Nonprofessional

TYPES OF

motivation, a distinctive modus operandi, and a plan. If you've decid-

4 SUPPORTING CHARACTERS

ed that the local crime lord doesn't want the heroes to find the alien artifact hidden in the ruins, ask yourself

CAST Each supporting character lalls into one of five general categories: villains; allies and sidekicks; employees and followers; experts; and extras. Most scenarios you create
will feature at least one villain and a number of extras. The appearance of other supporting characters depends on the heroes' choices and the decisions you've made aboul the setting.
SUPPORTING

why she cares, what she's likely to do about it, and how she's going to make her plan work. Does she want the ruins left abandoned to conceal evidence of a crime? Maybe she wants the artifact for hersell, and she's willing to let the heroes do the hard work of finding the relic so she can have her subordinates ambush them when they get back to town. Maybe she's more subtle than that

and plants a turncoat in the heroes'

Villains

group. O, she might use her influ-

A well-crafted villain is indispensable in any campaign. Villains are

ence in the community to have the heroes arrested. and their find con-

the people who don't want the heroes fiscated

to succeed and are willing lo act on their desires. In a classic roleplaying scenario, it is the villain's actions, such as attacking a populated settle-

Don't waste time developing villains that the heroes will never meet. It you've decided that the big boss is out of reach, concentrate on building

ment or killing someone the heroes know, that provoke the heroes into

character profiles for the major lieutenants and subordinates who will

action. O, if an adventure opens with the heroes doing something that wasn't caused by a villain's action, the villain might be reactive instead of proactive, acting as an

interact with the heroes. Think about
ways you can keep a "good" villain around from adventure o adventure; it the heroes have a dedicated foe that they can't get their hands on,

obstacle 1o the heroes' plans, Tust like the villains in good nov-
els or movies, villains in your campaign need to have a decent

you can create plots in which the old villains try new tricks, are forced into temporary alliances with their hated foes, or pursue special vendettas against the heroes.

A villain's power depends on his

A Cruel World

1ole in the campaign. An epic vil-

lains should be level § to 8, with spe-

lain--one who could be around from cial advantages or resources to

story to story--should be stronger make them @ match for the entire

than the entire group of heroes; in

party. An epic villain for this group

order to bring him down, they will

could be level 10 to 15, with numer-

have to make unusual preparations, ous underlings, exceptional re-

possibly embarking on a series of

sources, and a clear advantage over

adventures just to get ready to face the heroes on even their best day.

the true menace. Major villains

A villain doesn't have to be phys

might be defeated at the end of an

cally superior to the heroes. Indeed,

adventure, but each one is aboul as

an epic villain may not demonstrate

tough as the party, and it will take

any ability for combat and might

concerted and intelligent effort to de- never confront the heroes physical-

feat them. Minor villains can be dis: ly--at least not personally. Villains

posed of in a single scene, and aren't run in packs, surrounded by minions

much tougher than a single hero,

who fight for them. Some villains

Characters of lesser importance than may wield positional power, using

aminor villain, such as the deputies the authority of their office or their

and security guards around a more connections. A corrupt planetary

important character, are extras.

governor might be no match for the

# Example: A group of heroes av- heroes in a guntight, but the players

eraging achievement level S wan- are dreaming if they think the un-

ders from planet to planet as traders scrupulous governor is going to

and troubleshooters on their drive

shoot it out with them! Having «

freighter. A minor villain could be a

number of supporters to call upon or

character of level 3 to 6, perhaps a

enjoying some unusual positional

match for one hero alone. Major vil- authority can elevate what might be

aminor villain in most circum

E

stances to a major or epic villain.

Allies and
Sidekicks
The heroes aren't the only ones fight ing on the side of truth and justice.
Other characters may pass through, helping them against a common foe. Allies and sidekicks are characters who join the hero party. Allies are Gamemastercontrolled characters
who serve as guides, advisers, or
extra muscle for the heroes for a spe cific adventure. Sidekicks are player controlled henchmen who stick with a hero out of loyalty and friendship. An ally who isn't tied down to one
spot might eventually become a sidekick--if one of the heroes treats him with respect and demonstrates an honest friendship and concern for that character.
Allies are useful tools for the
Gamemaster. They can provide skills and firepower that the heroes lack in crucial situations. They can act as sources of information and plot de vices. Allies make a story more im mediate to the players--if a character known to the heroes is the victim of a crime lord, the
players find themselves more in volved in the story than if they'd only heard rumors of the villains.
Allies can only be acquired through roleplaying over time, and
they aren't perfect allies can de ceive, be deceived, betray, and make mistakes. Villains trying to win the heroes' confidence may join the party as allies.
Sidekicks represent a spe cial resource for the heroes. Unlike most supporting
characters, a sidekick is con trolled by a player, not by the
Gamemaster. Acting as a second

=
B
N[ 1 [H04d0S
! 1 St

Always obey your weren sidekick

Q]

=
B
CAST

Laborer

Medic

SUPPORTING

ot

Ruffian

Security pra

Soldier

Spacehand

Steward

Technician

Thug

Knowledge-caoking Vehicle Operation Technical Science Interaction
Survival
Culture
Athletics Medical Science Vehicle Operation Unarmed Attack Security Ranged Weapons System Operation
Administration
Any Science Melee Weapons

1500 1500 2000
3000
4000
2500
2000
1000
3500
5000
1000
3500 varies 3000 2500 4000 2000

character, a sidekick augments the an established reason to work

instead of skilled scientists. One

party's skill pool and fighting power. The player maintains a record
sheet for his hero's sidekick and controls his actions during play, but as the Gamemaster you can overrule

together.
Emplngees
Followers

and

member of the team is bent on climbing the corporate ladder. Another is « maverick who doesn't like doing what anyone tells him to do, let alone an exec he's just met. Imagine

any action that you think is unreasonable or out of character for the sidekick. Or there may be times when

From time to time, heroes need hired help. Part of your job is to roleplay employees and followers and main-

the headaches you can give to the players if their heroes must manage such subordinates.

you decide to take control of a side- tain their record sheets. Employees While employees and followers

kick in the interest of the story.

are characters personally hired by « are usually less competent than he-

Thoughts of selflessness and heroism hero and paid out of the hero's pock- Toes, they may match or exceed the

aside, it's a rare sidekick who will willingly sacrifice his life for a hero.

et. Followers obey a hero's orders be- heroes' skill in their areas of exper-

cause of the hero's cuthority,

tise. A party might hire a local guide

A hero can't just go out and buy a accomplishments, or magnetic per-

whose Movement, Survival, and

sidekick--the player has to demon- sonality. A character with military, Awareness skills are far superior to

strate through good roleplaying and successful adventuring that his hero has won the Iriendship, respect, and loyalty of the character in question.
Allies who join the heroes on a temporary basis might exceed the

civil, or corporate authority might be assigned followers to help him do a job. For example, the captain of starship may have many followers among the officers and crew of his
ship.

those of the heroes. Although their guide might prove worthless in a fight, the heroes will need his skills 10 get them through the adventure.
Here are a few guidelines to keep in mind when heroes deal with em-

highest character level in the party

Employees and followers are less `ployees and followers:

by several levels, although allies

competent than the hero himself, in-

who are equal or slightly inferior to the average hero are more common. Sidekicks never attach themselves to

clined to view the hero as their boss, superior, or leader. It it's part of their job description, employees will ac-

> Employees grumble when the job gets dirty, long, or dangerous.
» Noncombative subordinates

ahero of lower level. If a sidekick company a hero on an adventure. react like normal people to danger--

ever becomes more powerful or im-

Employees and followers range they hug the ground in a gunfight,

portant than the hero he follows--or the spectrum of competence, rebel- run away from hideous aliens, or

i

believes that he has become so--he strikes out on his own.
Sidekicks also make excellent character choices for players new to your campaign; the new player can leap in without a wait. The other he10es will already know something about the new hero, and they'll have

lion, and zeal. Imagine a hero who is an up-and-coming corporate troubleshooter. The company assigns a field team from the research division and puts the hero in charge. The leader of the field team might resent the hero, since he doesn't understand why an executive is calling the shots

freeze like a deer in headlights at the tirst sign of danger.
» Employees and followers expect 1o be treated decently and paid on time. Heroes who abuse these characters or fail to meet their obligations may provoke resignations, legal actions, or desertions.

» Most employees and followers
are hesitant to break laws, cross powerful people, or otherwise get themselves into serious trouble on their employer's behalf.

Heroes who are hiring employees or

acquiring followers must take the

time and trouble to look in the right

place. A highranking military officer . can't requisition or reassign person

nel unless he's on a base or aboard a

ship, and even then the base com

mander or ship captain may refuse his request.

Administration, Street Smart, Cul

ture, Interaction, or Leadership skill

checks may be called for in order to locate potential employees or fol . lowers and arrive at an understand " ing with them. In order to attempt one of these skill checks, the heroes

should be taking steps to locate Pprospective employees. If heroes

want to hire skilled and reliable men and women to fill out a ship's crew,

they'll have to look in the places that spacehands frequent, post notices or

run advertisements, and possibly conduct interviews. If the players

don't want to play out the process of

hiring a follower, you have free li

cense to throw incompetents, malin

gerers, criminals, and other rotten apples into their expedition.

The employeremployee relation ship is a business deal. The employ ee provides a service in exchange for asum of money. People with rare

and valuable skills are hard to find,

and expensive to hire. TABLE G23: EM PLOYEES lists some of the employees

beroes are most likely to hire. The availability column gives a

bonus or penalty to the hero's skill check for finding and hiring a partic ular type of employee the salary col

umn gives the basic monthly wage

that the employee expects.

A typical employee or follower

possesses a score of 8 to 11 (d44+7) in his key Ability, and d4 skill ranks in the specialty skills of his occupation. Employees with higher Ability

Scores or skill ranks can command

higher salaries than the numbers

given on the table above.

Assistant: A secretary, reception

ist, or clerk. Unusual assistants such

as a paralegal or travel or expense

secretary may be more expensive.

Cook: A basic ship's cook. A per

sonal chef could cost $5,000 a month

or more.



Driver: A knowledgeable local be hind the wheel of a land vehicle. A chauffeur is much more costly.
Engineer: A competent mechanic or repairman, possibly the foreman for a gang of laborers. A chief engi neer might be paid an extra $1,000
per month.
Escort: A goodlooking, witty, and charming companion for formal events. An escort may double as a cultural guide or a host for special
events, or even a bodyguard, for an
additional cost. Guide: A local who knows the
area where the heroes want to travel. An exceptionally dangerous or re mote destination may drive up the Pprice.
Interpreter: Someone who speaks the local or native language and a more common or universal tongue. An interpreter with negotiating or diplomatic skills costs an extra $2,000 to $5,000 per month.
Laborer: Unskilled labor for what ever needs done. If the work is at all technical in nature, the heroes must supervise or arrange for an engineer or technician to work side by side with the laborers.
Medic: A paramedic, nurse, or similar person with medical train ing. Many small communities and outposts, including small starships and driveships, can't support a med ical specialist, and so many medics have a second occupation. Among small tradesmen, the ship's medic often doubles as the communica tions or science officer.
Pilot: A spacefaring pilot usually hires on for a set number of transits, manning whatever spacecratt the employer provides. On the other hand, a planetary pilot often owns his aircraft the price given includes the cost of chartering the aircraft.
Ruffian: Lowclass, untrained muscle with few combat skills. A ruf fian us}mlly works one job at a time.
Security pro: A topnotch security specialist. Such an employee can be obtained through a private consul tant, a detective agency, or similar means.
Soldier: Most soldiers, marines, or other military personnel are paid by their respective governments. Profes sional mercenaries are usually very rare. In lawless areas, heroes and villains might find soldiers interest ed in supplementing their normal pay. Since bribery and corruption are involved, the cost is variable.

Spacehand: A trained laborer, miner, cargo handler, bridge or engi neering mate, or general mainte nance person. Spacehands have a general familiarity with their ves sels, and usually have dedicated skills to command crew stations. Many spacehands also possess the Acrobaticszerog training skill.
Steward: A personal valet or but
ler. A luxury in most settings, a stew ard fills multiple roles as he serves and watches over his charges.
Technician: A person with training in a highly technical field, such as
Computer Science, Technical Sci ence, or System Operation.
Thug: Lowclass muscle with mod
est combat skills. Likely to be over confident and hard to work with, but
more effective than a ruffian. Like ruffians, thugs prefer to work in groups.

=~
B
IN1L40AdNS 1S4

Experts
While experts are employees of a sort, they're unlikely to accompany a hero on adventures. Experts provide skills, resources, and information that the heroes couldn't get by them selves. A hero who needs to break into a Grid system might hire an ex pert hacker to do it for him, while a hero who requires medical attention could seek out surgeons or medical
technicians. Unlike employees, experts are
oneshot resources. A hero pays a fee to obtain a service, and when the contract is up, the expert doesn't
work for him anymore. Of course, it never hurts to keep a trustworthy lawyer, accountant, or investment
counselor on retainer. It's a good
idea for a hero to have someone to watch over his fortune if he travels a lot.
Experts also differ from employ ees in their level of expertise. They possess skill scores that are higher than the heroes' own scores in spe cific areas. Assume that an expert has a score of 10 to 13 (d4+9) in his key Ability, and d6+2 ranks in his key skills.
A list of some common experts ap
pears on TABLE G24: EXPERTS. The cost column gives the fee the expert
charges for a particular task or a particular length of time. An expert with high ranks in his key skills may charge more.
Academic: A hero can hire an aca demic to perform research, analyze

03

=
p
CAST
SUPPORTING

Expert
Academic
Attarney
Bounty hunter Burglar Consultant
Doctor
Hacker
Investigator
Scientist Surgeon

Ability INT INT DEX
INT
[ INT
INT
INT

Skill Knowledge
Law
Investigate
Stealth varies Medical Sci nce Computer Science Investigate Any Si nce Medical-surgery

Cost
200+/day 300+/hr
200+/day varies
1000+/day 250+
250+/day
250+/day varies
5000+

data, and examine theories. Depend- bounty hunter--or is the target of

sultant's skill check provides a modi-

ing on the scope of the project, the

one--the hunter must make Investi fier to the hero's attempt to use an-

academic may take from 1 to 12

gate-track checks o pick up the tar- other skill to get the job done.

weeks to deliver a result. Some acad- get's trail. Allow one check per day

Doctor: The doctor can use the

emics may work for free, especially if in the local region or star system, or the project promises to revolutionize one check per 10 days out of the re-

Medical Science-treatment skill to
attempt treatment of diseases or

their field or guarantees a chance to gion or star system. The hunter's

restoration of wound points. A

be published

progress in catching up to his target simple checkup costs $250, but diag-

Attorney: These experts charge by depends on the result of the Investithe hour; a criminal defense atlorney gate-track skill check: Critical Fail-

nosing a strange condition could cost $500 to $2,000, and the treatment

runs up as many as 100 billing hours ure, lose three days; Failure, no gain; could run $100 to $4,000 per week for

over the course of up to 6 months. Ordinary, gain one day; Good, gain d12 weeks.

Major civil suils can take up to 1000 two days; Amazing. gain three days.

Treating simple injuries doesn't

hours over the course of 12 months.

# Example: Zathos has been hired take long. One or two hours is suffi-

These are just ballpark figures-- to locate the sometimes elusive Jack cient for the doctor to treat a hero's

tough cases can take years to setile. Everstar. He starts 10 days behind, in injuries. A successful Medical Sci-

If @ hero i suing someone, an at- the last system Everstar was spotted. ence skill check allows the doctor to

torney may work for a percentage of the total award.

Zathos makes a skill check and gets an Amazing result. Now he's only 7

restore 2 wound points if using a first aid kit, or 4 wound points with a

Bounty hunter: If the heroes don't days behind; wherever Everstar was, trauma pack or more sophisticated

have the time or resources to find

a week ago, Zathos is there asking equipment. If this isn't suficient to

someone, they can hire a bounty

questions. If this brings Zathos into heal the hero, he might still be down

hunter. The amount of talent and pro- the same system as Everstar, he'll be a couple of wound points until he's

fessionalism among bounty hunters able to start making checks once

can vary widely.

every day.

had a chance to heal with time, or he could see a professional surgeon. In

Use the following system when a

Burglar: Hiring a break-in expert civilized areas, a doctor has access

hero isn't directly involved with &

is @ common tactic to acquire some- to medical equipment available at

bounty hunter's work. Finding some- thing when legal means aren't avail- his Progress Level.

one in the immediate region or state, able or expedient. Few burglars

Hacker: The primary function of a

or in the same star system, takes 2 o advertise their calling, so it takes

hacker is to infiltrate computer sys-

40 days (2d20). Finding someone out- some work to find a person who's

tems and retrieve data. Or, a hacker

side the region or star system requires 10 to 120 days (10d12} to

willing to take on the job. Exception- can upload something into the sys-

ally dangerous, difficult, or pro-

tem--a devastating virus, a com-

localize the quarry, plus another 2 to 40 days to locate him in the new re-

longed assignments may raise the price.

mand to shut down security systems, or any sort of lalse data. The more il-

gion or star system.

Consultant: This category in-

legal and dangerous a job is, the

Bounty hunters charge three times cludes any expert who might offer

their normal fee for traces that re-

advice or manage affairs for a hero,

more money the hacker will want Preparing a hacking job takes at

quire long or interstellar travel, and O, you can allow a consultant to

least 2 1o 24 hours (2d12). The job it-

twice as much again if they're hired add a bonus to a hero's skill check sell xarely requires more than a few

1o bring the quarry back instead of

when dealing with a problem in the minutes if the hacker is one of the

just locating him, Dangerous traces consultant's field. For example, a

clite.

may multiply the price again. Ex-

hero trying to push a repair order

Investigator: Although heroes

penses are the responsibility of the through a shipyard bureaucracy should do their own investigating

employer.
04 It a hero performs the job of a

could hire a consultant familiar with when they want to find out how the shipyard. The result of the con- something happened, from time to

=
b
INILH0dNS [SH)

Closing wounds and opening doors: Experts at work

time they may need to hire an expert to help them out. Us wally a private

eye or security specialist, inve

tors need anywhere from 3to 60 d

3d20), depending on how much evi

dence there is to sift through, the

types of te s necessary, the condi

tion of the site, and the number and
usefulness of witnesses.

Scientist: Mo scientists are asso

ciated with a university or corpora

tion. In order to secure the services of

one, a hero must either contract with

the corporate office ($3,000 a week 18 fair) or offer an honorarium to a uni

versity. A scientist can examine an

artifact or phenomenon in exacting

letail. Depending on the nature of

the request and the information or

materials available, the examina

tion could take anywhere from a

K to a year or more.

Surgeon: A hero who has suffered

mortal damage needs a surgeon. Re

pairing such severe injuries requires

anumber of hours depending on the

surgeon''s Medical Sciencesurgery

complex

1 check (see page 85 of

the Player's Handbook). The cost of

e facilities and extra personr 2] is

uded in the cost figure on T

The hero faces a hospital stay of d4 weeks to recover from the surgery, regain use of any damaged limbs, and acclimatize himself to any trans planted or artificial tissues. Each
A passerby who points out which way the villains went, a shopkeeper who sells something to the heroes, and the common guards and thugs are extras. Unlike ot 1er types of sup porting characters, you should make up extras on the fly, when they're needed.
Extras don't need much in the way of game slatistics, personality, or motivation. They're normal people, doing whatever it is they do from day to day. Extras lend depth and real ism to a scene. Instead of telling the players, "You find out that the vil lains caught the B train," consider the appearance of an irate subway passenger as an extra. You might re late the same information in a differ ent form: "A stout matron shoves her way to the front of the crowd on the subway platform. She has a tiny lap

dog clamped under one arm, and

she's red in the face. `Are you cops?

Some punks with guns just boarded

the B train!"" Using an extra to relay informa
tion like this takes a little more time,

but it helps to fill the cities and

streets of your campaign world. If the

heroes have queslions to ask, there's a universe full of supporting charac

ters who can interact with them

Imagine the heroe s quizzing the dog toting lady about details of the vil
lains' armament, condition, or destination. You'll have more fun

and you'll draw the play S Ii' e 2T into the story than if you simply an

nounce the information

Because an extra has only one
to do in any given adventure, each

requires only a minimal amount of

preparation.

You don`t need game

statistics for the matron d scribed above. The heroes probably aren't going to shoot at her, charm her, or

try to strike a business deal. Extras

who might turn out to be villains

need a bit more: a Constitution score

(for durability rating), an action check score, a combatrelated skill, a

W(--`(][)U[}, (lll'l IH'JY!N` some

armor

q5

b SUPPORTING CHARACTER TEMPLATES

Administrator
This Diplomat is a government bureaucrat or corporate employee--such as a city hall official, department head,
or station administrator.

CAST Several templates for typical supporting characters of different power and experience level are presented here. Each template includes the vital statistics for typical representatives of certain careers of Marginal, Ordinary, Good, and Amazing quality, including Ability Scores, action check scores, number of actions per round, key skills,
and signature equipment.

STR
DEX
CON
INT
WIL
PER

M

o

8

9

9

10

8

9

9

10

10 1

10

11

G

A

10

u

1

11

10

1

11

12

12 13

12

14

» Marginal characters--average are nonprofessionals. The average

members of society-- Ability Score of a mar-

Action check #Actiohs

9/4/2 11/5/2 12063 120603

2

2

2

3

small. SUPPORTING ginal template is 9, and the list of skills is

Employ marginal characters as extras. They don't have

the resources o talents of even a beginning hero, and

THE

shouldn't assume roles of importance in your game.

Marginal Skills: Business; Knowledge-sociology; Ad-
`ministration-bureaucracy, management; Resolve; Culture; Interaction-bargain, interview.
Ordinary Skills: Business--corporate 2: Administration-

» Ordinary characters have capabilities roughly equivalent to those of a beginning hero (level 1). They have a profession, a good selection of important skills, and an average of 10 points in each Ability Score.
Ordinary characters are above the norm. Minor members of your supporting cast, both villains and allies, can be characters of this quality.

bureaucracy 2; Culture--etiquette (specific); Deception-
bluff, bribe, gamble: Interaction-bargain 2; Leadership.
Good Skills: Law; Investigate; Culture-etiquette (spe4, cific)3, etiquette (specific): Administration-bureaucracy management 3 Resolve-mental 2; Leadership-command 2.
`Amazing Skills: Business--corporate 4; Knowledge--
computer, deduce 2; Administration-bureaucracy §, man-
agement 6; Interaction-bargain 4, interview 3; Leader-

> Good characters

wield power and versatility

equiva-

ship-command 4, inspire 2.
Equipment: Comm gear, data slate.

lent to level 6 heroes. The skill selection is both diverse

and advanced, and These characters

the average Ability Score is 11 points.
can be major members of the support-

Bartender

ing cast. Powerful villains and esteemed allies are characters of this quality.

The local Diplomat who tends bar, the bartender is a good
source of information, local news, and commiseration.

> Amazing characters are figures to be respected or feared. These characters have stunning power at their fingertips unless you're running a superheroic campaign (see Chapter 13: Campaign Design). They're equivalent in power to level 12 heroes, and have an average of 12 points in each Ability Score.
Amazing characters should be used only in extraordinary circumstances, such as for ultimate villains or dominant members of the supporting cast.
More powerful characters possess all the skills listed for inferior characters. For example, a Good character has Marginal, Ordinary, and Good skills.
These templates provide general guidelines. Feel free to modify them for your campaign's needs by changing Ability Scores or adding skills. For example, it's reasonable to allow a veteran and experienced character to have skills from a Good template, even if the character's Ability Scores aren't exceptional.
The individual characteristics of a member of the supporting cast should vary from figure to figure. Use the templates here when you need a character's statistics
quickly, or use them as a frame to construct your own supporting characters.

M

STR

9

DEX

8

CON

8

INT

8

WIL

10

PER

10

Action check 8i4/2

#Actions

2

o
10
9
10 9
1 11
10/5/2
2

G
1
10
11 10
12 12
11/5/2
2

A
12
1
1
1
13 14
12/6/3
3

Marginal Skills: Unarmed Attack; Vehicle Operation;
Business; Street Smart; Interaction-bargain, charm.
Ordinary Skills: Melee Weapons-bludgeon; Business-illicit, small; Knowledge; Street-knowledge,
criminal; Deception; Enfertainment.
Good Skills: Melee-bludgeon 2; Business-illicit 2; Street-knowledge 2, criminal 2; Deception-bluff, gamble; Culture; Interaction-bargain 3, charm 3, interview, intimi-
date, seduce, taunt.
Amazing Skills: Unarmed-braw! 2; Medical-psychology: Street-knowledge 6; Deception-bluff 3, bribe, gamble 3; Interaction-bargain 4, charm 4, interview 2, intimidate
2, seduce 3, taunt 3. Equipment: Club or stun baton.

9

Brawler Toughs and gang members stand as ready, low-grade Combat Specs for the average villain to employ.

Doctor
Medical technicians, surgeons, and experimental biolo-

=

gists are Tech Ops dedicated
tion of life.

to the

study

and

preservaD

STR DEX

M

o

G

A

10 1

12 14

9

10

1

12

STR

M

o

8

9

G

A

JHL

10

11

CON INT WL

10 n

8

9

9

10

12

13

DEX

10 1

CON

1

1

INT

10 11

8

9

10

1

12 13

10 1

12

14

PER

8

9

10

Action check 8/4/2 12/6/3 1363

#Actions 2

2

2

1
14773 3

WIL PER
Action check

9 9
10/5/2

10 10
12/6/3

11 1
13/6/3

12 11
141713

Marginal Skills: Athletics; Unarmed-brawl; Melee Weapons; Modern Ranged Weapons; Vehicle Operation;
Stamina; Street Smart; Interaction.
Ordinary Skills: Unarmed-braw] 2; Melee-blade; Modem-pistol 2; Stamina-endurance; Street-criminal, knowl-
edge; Interaction-intimidate.
Good Skills: Unarmed-braw! 4: Melee-blade 3, bludgeon 2 Stamina-endurance 2, resist pain; Knowledge-- irst aid; Resolve-physical; Leadership.
Amazing Skills: Melee-powered 2; Modern-pistol 4, SMG; Stealth-hide, sneak; Business-illicit; Tactics; Street-criminal 3, knowledge 3; Deception-bluff, bribe, gamble; Leadership-command 2.
Equipment: Cellular phone, concealed holster, short CF coat, 1 lmm charge pistol or autoflechette SMG.

#Actions

2

2

2|

3

SHILEOAdNS

Marginal Skills: Knowledge-computer; Life-biology; Medical-knowledge, treatment; Physical Science.
Ordinary Skills: Vehicle Operation; Medical-knowled154g2 e 2, psychology, surgery, treatment 2: Physical-chemistry: In-
vestigate; Interaction.
Good Skills: Knowledge-deduce; Life-biology 3; Medical-forensics, knowledge 3, surgery 2, treatment 4; System Operation; Administration-burecucracy; Investigate: Teach-Tech Op; Interaction-charm.
Amazing Skills: Business; Life-xenology; Medicalforensics 2, knowledge 4, surgery §, treatment 8, xenomedicine; Creativity; Teach-Tech Op 3; Leadership-command,
inspire.
Equipment: Forensics kit, life support pack, medical gauntlet, pharmaceuticals, surgical kit, trauma pack 1

Corporate Executive

lithere's money to be made, a corporation is going to get involved. The corp exec is a tough-nosed Diplomat who
sees o it that matters get settled in the Company's favor.

Laborer Even advanced societies require unskilled and semiskilled Tech Ops. Many colonies, mining outposts, and stations remain manpower-intensive far into the future.

STR DEX CON

M

o

G

A

8

9

10 1

9

10

1

12

STR

9

10

1

1

DEX

M

o

10 11

9

10

G

A

12 13

u

1

INT

10 1

12

13

CON

10

1

12

14

WL

10 1

12 14 INT

8

9

10 it

PER

8

9

10 1

WIL

9

10

11 12

Action check 42

#hctions

2

11752
2

12/8/3 13/6/3

2

3

PER

8

Action check 8/4/2

#Actions

2

9 10/5/2
2

10 11/5/2
2

11 12/6/3
3

Marginal Skills: Business--corporate; Knowledge-com-
puter; Administration-management; Deception; Interaction-bargain, interview.
Ordinary Skills: Modern Ranged Weapons; Business-- corporate 3, illicit; Deception-bluft, bribe 2; Interactionbargain 2, charm, interview 2, intimidate.
Good Skills: Modern-pistol; Vehicle Operation; Business--corporate 4, illicit ; Investigate; Resolve; Culture--
eliquette (specific); Interaction-bargain 4, charm 2; Lead-
ership. Amazing Skills: Business-corporate 8, illicit 4; Resolve
`mental; Interaction-bluff 4, bribe 4; interview 4, intimidate 3.
Equipment: Suit, comm gear, hand-held computer, de-

Marginal Skills: Athletics; Unarmed-brawl; Stamina--
endurance; Street Smart.
Ordinary Skills: Athletics-throw, specific sport; Meleeblade, bludgeon; Stamina-endurance 2; Street-knowledge; Vehicle-land.
Good Skills: Unarmed-braw! 3; Stamina-endurance 3,
resist pain; Business; Technical Science; Administration;
Deception-gamble; Interaction-bargain. Amazing Skills: Melee-blade 3, bludgeon 3; Stamina---
endurance 4; Knowledge-hobby, first aid; System Operation; Technical-juryrig, repair; Street-knowledge 4, criminal; Leadership.
Equipment: Jumpsuit, lifting hamess, combat knife.

flection inducer, stutter pistol, smart holster.

o

Military Officer

Reporter

A

Officers are usually Diplomats who select Combat Spec s their secondary profession. They may serve s advis

Whatever the medium, this Free Agent's mission is to discover the truth and inform the public.

ers, security chiefs, or consultants to private enterprises.

CAST M

o

STR

9

10

DEX CON

9

10

9

10

INT

9

10

WIL

10 1

PER

8

10

Action check 942

1si2

#Actions

2

2

G
11
10 1
11
1 12
11/5/2
2

A
12
1 11
12
13 13
12/6/3
3

STR
DEX
CON INT
WIL
PER Action check
#Actions

M 8
9
8 l
10
9 9/4/2
2

o
9 10
9 1
11
10 12/6/3
2

G
10 11
10 12
12
11 13613
2

A
10
1
1 13
14
13 147713
3

Marginal Skills: Creativity-journalism, photography;

SUPPORTING

Marginal Skills: Modern Ranged Weapons; Vehicle Op- Investigate; Street Smart; Deception; Interaction-charm,

eration; System Operation; Tactics; Leadership.

interview

THE

Ordinary Skills: Armor Operation; Modern-pistol, rifle;

Ordinary Skills: Stealth-shadow, sneak; Vehicle Opera-

Vehicle Operation; Knowledge--computer, military history; tion; Knowledge-deduce; Investigate-search, track; Inter-

System-sensors; Investigate-interrogate.

action--charm 2, seduce.

Good Skills: Unarmed-power; Modern-rifle 2, pistol 2;

Good Skills: Manipulation; Business; Law: Security:

Vehicle-space; Navigation: System-weapons; Tactics-in- Administration; Creativity-journalism 3: Resolve; Cul-

fantry; Leadership-command 2, inspire.

ture-etiquette (specific); Deception-bluff, bribe.

Amazing Skills: Tactics-infantry 3, space 3, vehicle 3;

Amazing Skills: Modern-pistol; Stealth-shadow 3,

Leadership-command 6, inspire 4.

sneak 3; Computer Science; Knowledge-deduce 3; Investi-

Equipment (ground): Fatigues, comm gear, GPS receiv- gate-search 3, track 3; Resolve-mental; Interaction--charm

er, imaging goggles, notepad computer with survey pro- 4, interview 3, seduce 2.

gram, automedic, armor (battle jacket for light duty,

Equipment: Audiorecorder, videorecorder, business

combat or powered armor for field duty). 11mm charge

suit, comm gear, surveillance gear, stutter pistol.

rifle, 15mm sabot pistol.

Equipment (air/space): Jumpsuit, zero-g web, comm gear, notebook computer with navigation and science

Scientist

programs, automedic, battle jacket, zero-g pistol.

In classic stories, these Tech Ops lurk in lonely research

outposts and secret laboratories.

Law Enforcer

M

o

G

A

A trained police officer or constable falls into this catego- STR

8

9

10

n

1y of Combat Spec.

DEX

9

10

12

12

CON

8

9

10 1

M

o

G

A

INT

10 1

12 14

STR

9

10

11

12

WIL

10 11

1

12

DEX CON

10 1

12 13

PER

9

10

11

12

9

10

1

12

Action check 9/4/2 11/5/2 1363 14773

INT

9

10

11

12

#Actions

1

2

2

3

WIL

8

9

10 12

PER

9

Action check 9/4/2

10
13/6/3

1

11

147713 18713

Marginal Skills: Computer Science; Knowledge; Life Science; Physical Science; Technical Science.

#Actions

2

2

2

3

inary Skills: Vehicle Operation; Two science spe-

Marginal Skills: Melee-bludgeon; Modern-pistol; Vehicle Operation; Law.
Ordinary Skills: Vehicle-land; Knowledge-first aid;

cialty skills at rank I; Two science specialty skills at rank ; System Operation: Investigate.
Good Skills: Modern Ranged Weapons; Knowledge-de-
duce; Rank 1 science specialty skills improved to rank 2

Law-enforcement; Investigate-interrogate;

Street-crimi-

Rank 3 science specialty skills improved to rank 4; Sys-

nal, knowledge; Interaction.

tem-sensors; Administration-burequcracy; Investigate;

Good Skills: Melee-bludgeon 2, powered; Modern-pis- `Teach-Tech Op Interaction.

tol 3, rifle; Law-enforcement 3; Security; Investigate-inter-

Amazing Skills: Modern-pistol; Business; Rank 2 sci-

rogate 2, search, track; Interaction-intimidate.

ence specialty skills improved to rank 4; Rank 4 science

Amazing Skills: Modern-pistol §; Law-court, enforce- specialty skills improved to rank 6; Creativity-academic

ment 6; Security-protocols 3, devices; Leadership-com- witing; Teach-Tech Op 3.

mand.

Equipment: Jumpsuit or e-suit, sensor gauntlet, comm

Equipment: Comm gear, weapon detector, smart hol-
ster, handcutfs, 9mm charge pistol, stun baton.

gear, notebook computer, stuter pistol in dangerous areas.

o

Soldier
Trained Combat Specs are found amongst every settle-
ment. Mercenaries fall into this category, but most soldiers are members of the military.

M

o

G

A

STR

9

10

1

12

DEX
CON INT

10

1

10 1

8

9

12

13

12

13

10 11

WIL

9

10

1

12

PER

8

9

10

11

Action check
#Actions

9/4/2
2

13/6/2
2

147713 15713

2

3

Sipy
`This Free Agent is @ member of an organization that needs people trained in espionage, security, sabotage, o
surveillance.

STR
DEX CcoN
INT
WIL
PER
Action check
#Actions

M
8
s 8
]
10
10
9/4/2
2

o
9
10 3
1
11
10
12/6/3
2

G
10
1 10
12
12
1
13/6/3
2

i
1
2z TR
13
13
n
147713
3

b
g
o MR =o)
|
)
=
E ==}

Marginal Skills: Armor Operation; Athletics; Unarmed

Attack; Modern
mina.

Ranged

Weapons:

Vehicle

Operation;

Sta-

--== tityOM-prardroigntoiancraoyllsSS; kkDiillllessc::eAMpctoiroodnbe-rabntli-ucpsfif-s,dtoeblf;reinbSseti;evaeIl,ntht-deshoradadgcoetw;ioM; nSa. necipuu--<=]=

Ordinary Skills: Armor--combat; Heavy Weapons; Un- lation; Stealth-sneak; Vehicle Operation; Staming; Inter-

amied-brawl; Modern--pistol, rifle 2; Stamina-endurance,action-interview, charm, seduce.

Knowledge-first aid: Interaction.

Good Skills: Acrobatics-daredevil; Modern-pistol 2,

Good Skills: Armor-combat 3, powered; Athletics--

SMG: Stealth-hide; Stamina-zesist pain; System Opera-

climb, throw: Melee Weapons; Heavy-direct; Modern--pis- tion; Investigate; Resolve; Culture-etiquette (specific).

(012, tifle 3, SMG; Stamina-endurance 3 Survival.

Amazing Skills: Modern-pistol 3, rifle, SMG 2; Stealth-

Amazing Skills: Armor-powered 3; Melee-blade, pow- hide 2, shadow 3, sneak 3; Investigate-search 2 Resolve--

ered 3; Modemn-pistol 3, rifle 5 Survival-training (spe-

`mental 2, physical 2; Interaction-charm 3, interview 3, se-

cilic); Tactics-infantry 3, vehicle; Leadership-command 3. duce 3,

Equipment: Fatigues, comm gear, imaging goggles,

Equipment: Business suit with antiscan weave, comm

battle jacket (light duty) or attack armor (field duty), 1mm gear, lockpick set, surveillance gear, 9mm charge pistol.

charge rifle (field duty), or autoflechette SMG (security de-

tail), § fragmentation grenades, combat knife.

Trader

Spacehand

`This is the typical independent merchant, a fast-dealing
Diplomat and entrepreneur with a dozen irons in the fire.

Zeto-g workers, crewmen, able-bodied spacehands, min-

ers, and other Tech Op workers use this template.

M

o

G

A

STR

8

9

10

11

STR DEX

M

o

10 11

9

10

G

A

DEX

12

13

CON

11

12

INT

9

10

1

1

8

9

10

1

8

10

11

12

CON

9

10

1

13

WIL

10

11

12

13

INT WIL

9

10

i

n

PER

10 1

12 u

9

10

1

12

Action check 9/4/2 /872

12/6/3 126813

PER

8

9

10

11

#Actions

2

2

2

3

Action check ~ 9/4/2 11/5/2 120603 12/6/3

#Actions

2

2

2

3

Marginal Skills: Unarmed-brawl; Technical Science; System Operation.
Ordinary Skills: Athletics; Modern Ranged Weapons;

Marginal Skills: Vehicle-space; Business; Knowledgecomputer; Culture; Interaction-bargain, charm.
Ordinary Skills: Business-illicit, small; Manipulationlockpick, pickpocket: Street Smart; Deception; Interaction-- bargain 3, intimidate.

Vehicle Operation; Stamina-endurance; System-engi-

Good Skills: Business-corporate, illicit 2, small 2; Law;

neering; Technical-juryrig; Interaction.
Good Skills: Unarmed-brawl 3; Vehicle-space; Business; Administration; Street Smart; Deception-gamble; Interaction-bargain 3, charm.
Amazing Skills: Athletics-climb; Stamina-endurance 3;

Investigate; Culture-etiquette (specific) 3, etiquette (spe-
cific): Steeet-criminal, knowledge; Resolve-mental; Deception-bribe, bluff.
Amaing Skills: Business-corporate 2, illicit 4, small 4; Knowledge-deduce 3; Administration-bureaucracy, man-

Knowledge-hobby, first aid; System-communications, en- agement; Deception-bribe 3, bluff 3, gamble; Interactiongineering 3, sensors; Technical-juryrig 3, repair 2; Interac- `bargain 6, charm ; Leadership.

tion-taunt; Leadership.

Equipment: Cellular phone, notebook computer, con-

Equipment: Jumpsuit, magnetic boots, vacuum mask,
2er0-g web, toolkit, zero-g pistol, combat knife.

cealed holster, short CF coat, laser pistol.

9

.

-

%

.

.

.

.

.

)

.

.

This chapter examines how heroic

personalities are built and incorporated

=

into your game universe. A newly

3

created hero is simply a fictional

character--the star of a movie or the
protagonist of a book--who's waiting to see what the story is going to be.

Defining the hero's personality, ambitions, and place in the world

represents final touches in the hero

e

creation process. Since these final

touches affect your campaign setting as

much as the hero's place in it, the process demands your involvement.

`MoTIVATION
Don't fee! constrained by the motiva-
L tions that appear in the Player's
Handbook. You can use anything as
fa character motivation. Encourage
jour players to think up new motivafians when they create their characfléis and fashion thelr backgrounds Fand histories. Interesting and believjabls métivations transform a simple, feck vlioin into a memorable threedimensional nemesis who will keep your players busy for a long time The best way to use motivations is Ho choose two for each hero or supporting cast member and see how ey interact, For example, players can easily couple the Winning Is Everything and Vengeance motivafions: The hero wants fo gain skill in order to make his revenga possible. i you joined the esoferic pursuit of ciance (Your to Leamn) with Can't et Encugh or Persanal Power, you
ight creats the perfect villain for your campaign: a brilliant, evil ge nius determined to use his knowl#dgs 1o enrich himseli.
at your disposal. T player is portraying his hero accurately, he'll be interested in adventure opportunifies that further his hero's personal Bgcals, and he'll avoid distractions ihiot might pull him away from realfising those goals. Knowing that the Phéross hiave o reason to embark on ian adventure or react in o certein way toa supporting character makes
it much easier to plan out adven | tures that will seize your players'
imaginations and fire their interest

MOoRAL
ATTITUDE
Moral attitude describes how a hero goes about his heroic {or villainous) career. Everybody knows that Gal lant characters don't take hostages or shoot prisoners, while an Unserupulous eharacter will do anything it 1akes {oget what he wants. Both characters might have the same mo-
tivation (Helping Others, perhaps, or
maybe Fun First); but the ways in which they pursue their goals are different
What sort of morality do the playo1 choose to adopt for their heroes? It tokes imagination and maturity to portray a hero with a strong moral
commitment, just as it does to play
an amoral protagonist whose morality is defined by the people he choos-
o8 to fight against,
Moral attifude shouldn't be a stat that a player rolls against or a tool that you use to build adventures for the heroes, It's an effort on the part of a player to make the story decisions that his hero would make.
You have the right fo reject any moral dttitude that seems poorly thought out or inappropriate. You shouldn't take that step lightly. Consider sitting down and talking to your players, and telling them a little
about the flavor you're looking for in
your game: Be prepared to negotiate.
Its the player's privilege to play the
character he wants. Look for ways to
make any moral attitade work in the context of the adventure.
Watch out for conflicting moral at-
titudes between members of the same adventuring group. If your

players portray their characters ac
curately, an Ethical and an Unscru pulous hero will conflict with each other. Sometimes conilict can s imu: late intense roleplaying. However, such tension can lead to conflict be tween players, which ultimately spoils the game. You shouldn't dictate the moral attitude of any hero, but it might not be a bad idea to ask
players to choose attitudes with the
other heroes in mind. Encourage your players to define
roles for their heroes that build on
their moral attitudes in a constructive fashion. For example, the smug-
gler captain might be Corrupt,
willing to breal laws or agreemen for material gain, but it doesn't mean that she's irredeemably evil. She
may be brave, loyal, and faithful,
dedicated to batlling injustice and wrong wherever she finds it, but still willing to allow nonviolent evils to pass by unchallenged. While she's not the right hero to clean up t town's seedy underside, she'll stand shoulder to shoulder with the other heroes against the alien invaders,
CHARACTER TRAITS
Character traits represent style-- how does the hero conduct himself when in action? Traits are the finishing touches to the character sketch. the idiosyncrasies and quirks that
bring a character to life. A hero
should change motivation or moral attitude only in the most unusual of
circumstances, but character traits
`may surface or fade away without

~

SETTING

p

CHARACTERS IN THE STORY

ATTRIBUTES
much consequence. You don't need them in the game, since the way a player handles his hero constitutes the major definition of the character's personality, but they can be good reminders to your players of how to stay in character.
You can add any reasonable personality trait or attitude to the list of roleplaying attributes. Encourage players to use their imaginations and build characters with engaging, multifaceted personalities. Real people aren't one-dimensional caricatures; a well-written fictional character isn', either. Take some time to ask players why their characters are lazy, selfish, or brave. If a player doesn't have a ready answer, he might be moved to think about who his character is and how he came to be that way.
HEROES WITH HisTORY
A hero's background should be reflected in the roleplaying attributes the player selects. A close look at the history and personality a player decides to include in a hero provides some excellent insights into what type of hero this character should be, 1t's one of your jobs to point out possible connections or relations between the hero's background, motivations, career, skill selection, and character traits.
102For example, consider the player who selects the character flaw of Dirt

A campaign must provide a way for

every hero to fit into the setting and

the adventures that take place with

in it. Each hero has a unique back-

ground, history, goals, and personal-

ity. When you help a player develop

these traits, you're giving the player

amore believable and well-rounded
hero, one that the player under-

stands and likes from the start

You can create a decent character

history with just a few notes. Where

was the hero born? What's his family

like? Why did he decide to choose

the profession and career that he

did? What kind of education did he

receive? Why is he getting involved

Poor. How did the hero become destitute? Was he born into squalor, or did the hero do something to deserve wretched poverty? Has poverty led him to become motivated by greed, desiring nothing more than to climb out of the economic gutter? Or does he come from a society unconcerned with poverty or wealth?
Lack of wealth might be caused by a lack of Culture or Interaction skills. If the hero grew up as a sireet urchin in the urban wastelands of an industrial planet, it might be hard for

in the story at hand? You have a variety of ready-made
histories and motivations to draw
from in the world around you. Corpo-
xations, military services, and goverment administrations all employ heroic characters. Adventures take place as these organizations send heroes into trouble spots. A hero hired to troubleshoot a computer system on a distant outpost is a believable, realistic character, with a ready-made excuse to head off into the adventure you've planned.

him to deal with people from the middle and upper classes of the soci-

Background

ety. He might favor pushing his luck through blustering or intimidation, since that's the way he is used to dealing with people back home. On the other hand, he may grow nervous

People in real life define themselves through their backgrounds--home,
family, friends, and place of origin are the foundations of an individuals personality and motivation.

and uncomfortable around superiors, Well-developed fictional characters

lapsing into sullen silence or relying on strained humor. The possibilities

are no different. Not all people react
to their upbringing and situation in

are infinite. The same street urchin
could grow up to be a charming hus

the same way; one character from a
rural, depressed area might enlist in

tler, carefully hiding the evidence of a low upbringing
A well-built character is more than a collection of individual parts.

the military in order to escape his hometown; another might work through college on scholarships and night jobs, becoming a research sci-

The synergy resulting from the clash of background, motivations, and the other elements that make up a char-

entist. Each character started with the same opportunities, but chose a different path.

acter create memorable heroes that
compare favorably with the bestloved characters of science fiction literature. Encourage your players to develop their heroes in the creation process and during play.

A player shouldn't have to write a complete biography of his hero, but it might help to have an idea of how the hero came to be. His background might suggest special skills, talents, or contacts he should have. It also

may point out unresolved stories or

conflicts the hero may have to deal

with. Failures and setbacks are just
as important in forming a hero as
successes and accolades. Work with your players to create
the outline of a good history and background for each character. Let the player do most of it--the hero is his or hers to play, aiter all. If a playerdevelops a hero who just won't fit in your game, offer compromises or suggestions that will help him fit in. When a player presents a hero without any background, ask some questions: "Where did this guy come from? What's he doing out in space?" and see what the player comes up
with.
Problem Backgrounds
Some heroic backgrounds can present difficulties. Heroes who begin as high-ranking officers, important politicians, or top corporate executives may have resources that beginning heroes shouldn't have. Heroes who have too much money or power in their hands cannot be challenged inmost adventures.
That said, nothing is impossible. You can allow unusual position or rank with a little work. Maybe the character's authority won't be recognized--imagine a planetary governor whose first job is to pacify an entire outlaw world with only a sys-
tem cutter and a half-dozen aides.
A corporate hotshot might be in the doghouse, a virtual exile in a nasty job that no one else wants. His
requests for funds and equipment
could be lost, misplaced, or ignored with depressing regularity. Wealthy heroes can be temporarily down on their luck, and high-ranking military officers might be assigned to disorganized or neglected sectors.
On occasion, you can allow a player to create a hero with an unusual amount of power and authority for the sake of a good campaign scenario, For example, let a hero to be the captain or commander of a mil tary or survey vessel. Although he's subject to orders from fleet superiors,
this can develop into a campaign in
which the heroes can seek out new
life and new civilizations, and boldIy go where no one has gone before.

~
B
SINGIHLLY
103

--~suggest to create adventures that have an immediate and obvious sig-

nificance to the heroes. As a hero re-

p

solves his early motivations or

defeats old villains, his background

might change. New motivations and

new adventures bring a natural evo-

lution to the game, and changes during play keep the heroes and the

campaign interesting.

ConTACTS ATTRIBUTES

&

ALLEGIANCES

Many heroes have access to a spe-

one in the governor's office as a contact, a person who is easier to reach and less conspicuous than the most important person on the planet
Information An information contact can discover things the heroes normally couldn't find out. You can use this character as a mouthpiece when you need to pass information to the heroes during an adventure. Other times, the players might think of asking their contacts for help when they don't know what they should be déing.

cial resource in the form of a person
or organization they can call on in times of need. A contact is an individual or small group of individuals that have the power to assist the hero in some way. Unlike a contact, an allegiance represents a person or organization to whom the hero owes

loyalty--a corporation, government

agency, military organization, or
similar group. Any hero can choose to begin a game with an allegiance,

and some backgrounds or career

packages logically require a begin-

ning hero to choose an allegiance. Resource

A resource contact can provide what-

Contacts Each contact a hero has should be

ever you want to give the heroes-- equipment, money, personnel, or transportation. A soldier hero may

developed as a supporting character. not be able to take his battle armor

If the contact is in a risky occupation into a starport under normal condi-

or brought into the line of fire by the hero, fill out a complete hero sheet.

tions, but a resource contact might
be able to obtain a suit for special

However, if the contact isn't going to training purposes. Resource contacts
get shot at or be called upon to make may have subordinates whose ser-

skill checks, leave the description as a simple sketch of a few notes.

vices a hero needs. Obviously, the contact might get bent out of shape if

Contacts don't normally accompa- the hero i careless or indiscreet

ny heroes on adventures, unless a
task is of compelling interest to the

with the resource he's been given.

contact. The purpose of a contact is to provide information, resources, or
expert skills. Contacts differ from the followers, allies, and sidekicks described in the previous chapter. Most of them aren't inclined to risk their lives or their prosperity for a hero.

Resource Contacts

`When a player chooses a contact
for his hero, you should decide how much assistance the contact can provide. A rule of thumb is that the more powertul, important, or wealthy the

contact is, the less time the contact
has for the hero. If a hero lists the
planetary governor as a contact, it
should become clear that the governor is hard to reach and constrained
10 by the merciless gaze of public scrutiny. It might be wiser to have some-

event such as supemova--if his contactis @ noted astrophysicist, he could bring a recording over to the observatory and ask his friend to take a look.
Other Contacts
A contact can be just about any kind of character that a player can imagine. Even a library clerk can help the heroes out by permitting admission into restricted archives or allowing them to do research after hours. Allegiances Much like a contact, an allegiance acts as a source of information, resources, and general help for a hero. Unlike a contact, an allegiance rep-
resents a tie to a larger organization.
As a result, an allegiance has the potential to produce correspondingly greater effects than a contact.
The downside of an allegiance is that the hero may be subject to orders and policies that restrict the hero's actions and force the hero to do things contrary to personal desires. Another disadvantage is that people who don't care for the hero's organization won't think much of the hero either. Agents of rival organizations view him as an enemy.
For the Gamemaster, an allegiance provides a ready and easy means to direct a hero. A command from a hero's organization can manipulate him into all sorts of adventures. Since the organization views the hero as an employee, it will hand out tasks for the hero to perform.
UansdingAlCleognitaancctses
It shouldn't require a skill check fora hero to make use of a contact or allegiance. Asking a local criminal about gang activity is simply smart play.
A skill check may be appropriate when a hero attempts to acquire ex-

~ tinct advantage. Resources include
top-notch personnel or exceptionally fine equipment. The expert can con-

sult with others in his field, gaining a bonus on his own skill check.

b

Amazing success: The requested

information is extremely accurate,

granting the heroes a significant ad-

vantage in the next part of the ad-

venture. Any request for resource:

evaluated as crucially important,
and the heroes receive personnel, SIngIYLLY materials, or funds well in excess of

what they thought they would need.

An expert has access to specialized knowledge in the very field the he-

1oes need, and automatically suc-

ceeds in analyzing the situation.

ceptionally sensitive information,
requisition unusual resources, or call
upon his contact or allegiance in areas outside its normal territory or
jurisdiction. Interaction, Business,
and Street Smart are commonly used

in an inappropriate situation, or far
from its base of operation # Example: A hero seeking scien-
tific advice from his crime boss contact suffers a +2 penalty to the skill check. Its not that the crime boss is

Lasing Contacts and Breaking Allegiances It can be difficult to keep track of contacts or allegiances over the course of a campaign. Since contacts

when associating with contacts; Administration, Business, and Interaction are useful in dealing with allegiances.
Once you've selected the most appropriate skill for a hero to use, several modifiers may apply. If the hero has irritated, insulted, or abused his connection in the past, the skill check should suffer a penalty. 1f the hero has been extremely generous with a contact or demonstrated loyalty to an allegiance, apply a bonus

unwilling to help--he just knows nothing about science and probably doesn't know anyone who does.
The grade of success governs the type and degree of assistance a hero receives. Some rough guidelines:
Critical Failure: No help is forthcoming.
Marginal success: Information is partial or outdated, resources may be delayed or inadequate, or an expert might have to ask permission before he can work on the problem.

are maintained by story decisions and roleplaying, they can be alienated or lost in the same way. A hero who is rude or ungrateful o his contact is likely to find that his contact isn't willing to help him the next time he's in town. Similarly, a hero who violates his organization's code of ethics, policies, or laws of conduct may find himself unemployed or even wanted for criminal actions.
You have the option of terminating a contact or even an allegiance by

instead. In addition, modifiers may be called for if the hero attempts to

Ordinary success: Information is sufficient to steer the heroes toward

means of events in the campaign.
Contacts die in the line of duty--

make use of his contact or allegiance their next goal. Resources fulfill the heros needs. An expert can examine the situation and make a skill check.

perhaps while coming to the hero's
aid. They can retire, change jobs, or relocate. Meanwhile, agencies, mili-

Sample Allegiances
> >

Good success: Requested information is detailed and accurate, possibly allowing the heroes to skip an intermediary step or approach the

tary organizations, and even nations
may fall into ruin, effectively ending an allegiance. While these incidents may produce fantastic material for

next part of the adventure with a dis- the campaign's story, it's generally

105

~
p
RTTRIBUTES

TABLE G25: STARTING SOCIAL STATUS

Authority
+4 +3
+2 +3 +1

Wealth
+2 +2
+3 +3 +3

Fame
0 +1
+1 +3 +2

Profession
Combat Spec Free Agent
Tech Op
Diplomat Mindwalker

Career

+2

0

+1

Ambassador

++11

+1
1]

+0 1

BBoodyugunartdy hunter

0

0

1

Brawler

+1

1]

+1

Cleric

+1 0

+1 +2

1] Computer tech +1 Corparate merchant

+1

+2

+1

Doctor

o

+1

+1

Engineer

1

+2

Entertainer

+1
+e

+1

Explorer

+2 First contact consul

0

+e2

Gambler

+1

0

Gunner

1]

1

Hacker

+2

o

Law enfoarcer

+1

+1 Martial artist

0

0

Mercenary

+1

+1

Pilot

+0



+1

Reporter

0

+1

Schaolar

0
+1

+1 1 SSceiecntuistrity specialist

+1

o

Spacehand

+2

o

Soldier

+03 SSptyellar nable

1]

Trader

Perk

+3

Celebrity

+1 Filthy Rich

+1 Good Luck

+1 Powerful Ally

+1

Reputation

Flaw
Bad Luck Dirt Poor
Infamy
Primitive Spineless

Allegiance

best to minimize such comprehen sive changes. You can also consider allowing the character to develop a new contact with the old one's suc cessor, or swear an allegiance to a new organization.
SocIAL STATUS
Achievement points measure ad vances in fighting power, technical or social skills, and overall compe tence. Another way to record a hero's progress through the campaign is the hero's social status. These option al rules describes how high a hero has climbed on society's ladders. Is he a junior operative, a topnotch field commander, or a director?
A hero may be a level 20 Free Agent and the toughest operative in his organization, but still take orders from lowerlevel characters with a social status higher than his. Com petence and ability do not always bring success in society.
Social status is divided into three categories: authority, wealth, and fame.
Authority
Authority is a gauge of a hero's im portance in the campaign, although it isn't as fair or absolute as a hero's experience level. Some heroes prefer to remain anonymous, avoiding the duties and obligations that come with a standing in the world. Other heroes gladly accept the challenges of a higher station. By elevating his social status, a hero declares his in tention to control events in the world, instead of responding to events dri ven by outside forces.
Heroes with a high authority level occupy positions of power. They're highranking military officers, im portant elected officials, corporate executives, department heads, or se nior bureaucrats and administrators. They gain strong allegiances to spe cific organizations and the ability to bring the organization's resources to bear on situations they encounter.
Wealth
Social status also serves as a mea sure of a hero's wealth, finances, and investments. Wealthy heroes may be able to afford starships, planetary bases, or other extremely expensive

Description Convicted felan, slave Authority: +5 penalty Wealth: Nane Fame: +5 penalty Conscript, prisoner,
indentured worker Authority: +4 penalty Wealth: $500/month Fame: +4 penalty Enlistee, apprentice, laborer Authority: +3 penalty Wealth: $1,000/month Fame: +3 penalty
Junior enlisted man, intern, Aulatbhoraerrity: +2 penalty Wealth: $1,500/month Fame: +2 penalty
Midranking enlisted man, administrative assistant
Authority: +1 penalty Wealth: $2,000/month Fame: +2 penalty Senior enlisted man,
executive assistant Autharity: no modifiers Wealth: $2,500/month Fame: +1 penalty
Topasesnilsisttaednt mmaann, agteecrhnician, Authority: no modifiers Wealth: $3,000/month
Fame: +1 penalty
Noncommissioned officer, supervisor, specialist
Authority: no modifiers Wealth: $3,500/month Fame: no modifiers Warrant officer, junior manager,
technical expert Autharity: 1 bonus Wealth: $4,000/month Fame: no modifiers Junior officer, manager, field
agent, lacal celebrity, community leader Authority: 1 bonus Wealth: $4,500/month Fame: no modifiers Officer, local manager, field leader Authority: 1 bonus Wealth: $5,000/month Fame: no modifiers, 1 contact

STATUS

Level 11

Description
Staff officer, junior executive, local administrator
Authority: 2 bonus Wealth: $6,000/month Fame: no modifiers, 2 contacts

Line officer, executive, local representative
Authority: 2 bonus Wealth: $7,000/month Fame: 1 bonus, 4 contacts

Comdmireancdtaro, fdfiicsetrr,icatssriestparnet sentative regional celebrity
Authority: 2 bonus Wealth: $8,000/month Fame: 1 bonus, 6 contacts

Senior command officer, director, department chief
Autharity: 3 bonus Wealth: $10,000/month Fame: 2 bonus, B contacts

Juniiodrentf,lagnaotifofincearl, rjeupnrioersenvticaetivperes Authority: 3 bonus Wealth: $15,000/manth Fame: 2 bonus, 10 contacts

Flangaotifofincearl, cveilceebrpirteysident,
Authaority: 3 bonus Wealth: $25,000/manth Fame: 3 bonus, 12 contacts

Senior flag officer, senior vice president, agency director
Autliarlty: 4 bonus Wealth: $50,000/month Fame: 3 bonus, 15 contacts Joint command officer, corporate
board member, interstellar representative, planetary ruler Authority: 4 bonus Wealth: $100,000/manth Fame: 4 bonus, 18 contacts

Armed services chief, corporate

CEO, interstellar

celebrity

Authority: 4 banus

Wealth: $200,000/month

Fame: 4 bonus, 25 contacts

Commanderinchief, megacorpo

rate CED, interstellar

ruler

Authaority: 5 bonus

Wealth: %1,000,000/month or more

Fame: 5 bonus, 50 contacts

--~
p
S1LNAILLLY

--~
P

associates with, or supports in some
way. For instance, a high-profile hero may be friends with a local govemor because he offered financial support and an endorsement in the governors last reelection campaign.

ATTRIBUTES
purchases. Through ownership of
profitable enterprises, wealthy char-
acters exert influence of their own
One effect of a high wealth level is
asteady flow of money into the character's account. Even if he doesn't
spend time pursuing business inter-
ests, his existing investments and en-
terprises earn money for him. At the highest levels of wealth, characters
could pull in thousands or millions of dollars every month.
Fame
Some people wield influence out of
proportion to their authority or wealth. Famous celebrities, retired politicians, and renowned scientists are examples. People respect and fear those whom they regard as their social superiors; this translates to contacts and bonuses in encounter scenes for a characler with a high fame level
The Social Status Scale
Social status is broken into 21 levels, ranging from 010 20. It's likely for a heto 1o have different levels in the three categories; lor instance, a hero with lots of money but no special position or authority may have a social
108status of 7/15/8 for authority, wealth, and fame, respectively. Military offi

cers and civil servants usually wield more authority than wealth or fame; a starship commander might have a status of 14/8/8.
A hero's authority level gives him a bonus or penalty in dealing with organizations allied to or associated with his position. This may be ap-
plied to Administration, Business,
Law, Investigate, Street Smart, or Leadership.
Wealth level describes how much money the hero commands for his principal employment or business investments. The number listed is rough estimate, which you may ad just. If you allow heroes to collect salaries, you should use the rules on Income and Finances" later in this chapter for spending and receiving money--if heroes don't have any bills to pay, the monthly income list: ed on TaBLE G26: SociAl StaTus will probably be loo much to hand out
Fame level gives the hero a bonus in dealing with individuals who are aware of his status and likely to be impressed by it. It could also provide
a penalty to encounters in situations
where fame is expected and a hero has a low fame level. Skills this bonus may apply to include Administration, Business, Culture, Deception, Interaction, and Leadership. A character with o high fame level gains bonus contacts. These contacts are people whom the hero sponsors,

Starting Sacial Status The social status of a beginning hero depends on profession, career, background, and the perks and flaws the
player selects. Use TaBLE G25: START-
ING SocIAL STaTus, Heroes start with a
social status of 0 in each category. If
a character is using a career not list-
ed on the table, or no career at all, choose a career that most closely matches the character's concept.
# Example: Raiaza is a fearsome weren. She's a Combat Spec and soldier, with the Primitive flaw and an allegiance. Her social status is 7/3/0. While neither rich nor famous, Raiaza has the ability to command in her organization. Meanwhile, Jack Everstar begins play as a dashing actor of some fame. He's a Diplomat and entertainer with the Celebrity perk. With a social status of 3/6/3, Everstar has almost no ability to issue orders, but has begun to make aname for himself.
You should take a free hand in adjusting hero's social status. If your campaign takes place in an urban blight, heroes might have very low status; if your heroes are fo be the champions of a galaxy, adjust their social status accordingly.
INncomE & FINANCES
Should you keep track of how much money a hero has? People in the everyday world have to balance their checkbooks and mind their expenses, but it's not particularly exciting for heroes to be constrained by such mundane concerns. Here are several ways that you can address
this issue in your campaign.
Money Doesn't Matter
After players select equipment for their beginning heroes, throw finances out the window. If the heroes need a specific piece of gear, assume that its provided by their employer, sponsor, or parent organization. When an agency assigns a mission to a hero, the tools to get the job done are included.
If the heroes want to make use of

~
b
SILngIyLLY

Who's broken-hearted now?

specialized equipment or big-ticket
items, you might have them attempt
contact o allegiance rolls in order to get their hands on the gear. Since they are supported completely by
their parent organization, they're
also obligated to undertake the mis-
sions they're assigned.
In the Ballpark
Aheros wealth level represents the amount of money the hero makes each month plying a primary trade. Itmay be a salary or the sum of commissions, bounties, negotiated contacts, research grants, interest, or dividends on investments.
Assume that the hero has liabilities proportionate to his income; 75% of his monthly salary goes toward upkeep. The other 25% is disposable income.
Since this method involves estimation, don't worry about calculating loans, interest rates, credit cards, orany other headaches of modern financial systems. If a hero wants something, he can save up to buy it Atter all, heroes tend to confiscate equipment from bad guys, so they
accumulate assets faster than aver-
age folks do.

1t heroes accumulate money too quickly, you can rule that participat ing in prolonged adventures hurts their income. If a hero's principal
source of income is carrying cargo
and passengers on a system freighter and he spends weeks flying the other heroes around on various adventures, he won't eamn an income that month.
Heroes Pay the Rent
The most realistic and involved option is to keep close track of the he1oes' expenses. Heroes at the low end of the income scale may be motivated to undertake adventures just to stay out of debt. The tables below provide rough guidelines for some of the expenses a hero might face:

Housing and Utilities

Squalid

5100

Poor

5250

Tolerable $500

Average 1,000

Good

2,000

Excellent 5,000

Posh

$10,000

Magnificent 525,000+

Lifestyle

Miserly 0.5 x Housing

Average

1 x Housing

Comfortable 15 x Housing

Luxurious 2 x Housing

Exotic

5 x Housing

Absurd

10 x Housing

Payments and Maintenance Payments 5% of value Maintenance 1% of value

Housing and Utilities covers the basic necessities of putting a roof over the hero's head. Lifestyle covers
groceries, clothing, entertainment,
housekeeping, and anything else the hero needs to get along. Payments and Maintenance refers to the cost of any items the hero owns that are worth more than a month's salary. For example, a hero with a $20,000 used skycar must pay $1,200 per month on payments, insurance, and maintenance.
Heroes can do anything with their finances that they like. But remember, heroic fiction isn't about going to work at a 9-t0-5 job, paying the mortgage, and buying a new car now and
109 then. Its about heroes doing things
that ordinary people don't do.

$

ACHIEVEMENT Gaining Levels

PoINTS

The reward for accumulating achievement points is an increase in

`The number of achisvement points jou gward to heroes--and the time hwhen you award them--is under your control- 11 up o you to decide just how quickly heroes will advance

level. When a player completes his hero's achievement track, he exchanges achievement points for an equal number of skill points, The skill points can be used to improve

fn your campaign.

existing skills, purchase new skills,

iyou give out toofew achieve- purchase last resort points, purchase

fent points, heross will advance too an achievement benefit, or purchase

slowly, and some players may be-

azank benefit, or they can be stored

Eome bored. T you give out too many, for later,

heroes will quickly become high-

While you are free to award

Jovel heavyweights without much of achievement points at any time dur.

& story to justily their ascent in

ing an adventure or game session,

power. When the game is too hard or you should wait until an adventure

is completed belore allowing a hero

to gain a level. A hero learning new
skills or improving old ones needs

training or study time. Of course, if

» Lo achievement points per adventure is fuir as an award for

the hero spends a lot of time in an extended interlude of travel or some

each heroin the group; if the adven- other long period of waiting, you can

ture-ds long-orespecially dramatic, decide that the hero's free time is

Gward | pointpertwoor three game sessions.
» Award on individual bonus of 1

sufficient to allow advancement.
In addition to learning new skills and increasing skill ranks, heroes

point if cplayer depicts his hero's motivation, moral attitude, and char acter traits particularly well,

may alsobe able o acquire achievement benefits. These are special
bonuses, perks, or abilities keyed to

»-Award anindividual bonus of 1 the hero's achievement level. For ex-

pointita herodid something truly ample; o Combat Spec who reaches

spectacular, noble:self-sacrificing,3rd-level may choose to use his skill

orheroic

pointsto improve his Strength score.

i the same Combat Spec wants to

Forexample; if your group plays a game session once or twice o week. and anradventure takes four sessions 16 complets, you would hand ont4 156 achievement points per month efcontimuing play. Naturall i you roleplay more often, your he-

improve his Intelligence score, he

must wait until he has achieved 6th

lovel. See TasLE P2

BEN EVEMENT

EFITS on page 127 of the Player's

Handbook for a selection of achieve-

ment benefits that are available to

heroes

1o6% willise more quickly.

AWARDS & PENALTIES
Should you ever strip exp ience powers, or benefits from a hero? In
general, the answer is no. If you feel
the need to penalize a player, the penalty of choice should be a lack of new experience or awards, and not a removal of benefits that have al ready been awarded.
Withholding awards is a powerful tool. It sends a clear message that you think that the play r scre d up in the adventure. Naturally, you shouldn't use this casually or spite fully. Here are some cases in which you might be justified to withhold achievement points:
» The hero committed violations of stated aims, morals, or traits.
» The hero--or heroescomplete the adv of motivation, inter bickering, or by insisting on sticking with a ta that you've told the player or players will never work
» The hero--or heroes--completed the adventure or resolved a situa tion by using uniair or overwhelming
force, or by allowing supporting
characters to take all the risks and do the job for them.
» The player insisted on follo acourse of action that ruined the ˘
venture for everyone else.
» The player derailed the adven ture by being rude, abu critical, or sive {o the other players.
Obviously, this is a subjective measurement. You shoIdrn't further `H] penalize a player who was victim-

==
P

Just like a skill rank increase, this should be a rare reward. Once or twice in the career of a hero is sufficient. Learning new skills is an important part of the normal achievement system, so don't hand out free skills unless a player impresses you.

Removing Perks and Awarding Flaws
Perks and flaws can serve to punish poor play. & hero with the Filthy Rich perk might lose it as his accounts are frozen in response to illegal trading. A hero may lose his Celebrity perk if
he commits a crime that becomes

Rank Benefit

public knowledge. In fact, you might reverse Reputation or Celebrity into

ACHIEUENERTS

A hero who purchases a rank benefit ahead of time (see page 63 in Chapter 4: Skills in the Player's Handbook) becomes capable of some advanced

Infamy, Well-known people who engage in scandalous behavior become the favorite whipping boys of the press.

ability involving a specialty skill,

despite the fact that the hero hasn't Loss of Achievement achieved the skill rank at which this Paints

ized by bad dice rolls. Players with good ideas that don't work out shouldn't be penalized either ... just as players with bad ideas that do work out shouldn't be encouraged to repeat reprehensible actions.
In addition to withholding experience, you can apply a few other awards and penalties when the cir-
cumstances warrant. Save these
measures for extreme examples of good or bad roleplaying.

benefit would normally be obtained. You can consider rewarding hero by granting him or her « rank beneit, perhaps in a case when the hero has recently used a particular specialty skill frequently and successfully. However, it's not a good idea to hand out a rank benefit that is supposed to be eamned by achieving the required rank. (Such benefits are marked with & "®" symbol in Chapter 4 of the Player's Handbook.)

It's within your power to strip a hero of any or all achievement points he has eamned since making his last level. Clearly, this punishment is
grave and should be reserved for the
worst cases of player thoughtlessness. Take the player aside and try to find out what the problem is; maybe you can work out a change in the character concept or history to ex-
plain the hero's actions, or somehow
find a way to turn this into a positive

Skill Rank Increase An increase in a skill rank is a significant reward, especially at higher skill levels, so use it sparingly.
For example, you might decide that a hero's Computer Science-- `hacking skill should be raised from rank 3 to rank 4 because of a brilliant
and innovative feat of computer use
conceived by a player. The player
must roleplay the situation by de-

Last Resort Points

step for your campaign.

Spending and purchasing last resort Story Developments

points can grow expensive, but you can award deserving characters with a last resort point on occasion. One of the best times to hand out last resort point is after an adventure in which heroes demonstrated the best examples of roleplaying and heroism, and were forced to spend one or more points to succeed.

One of the best ways to get players to consider the consequences of their
heroes' actions is to allow the story
to develop naturally from their choices. If the heroes kill hostages to get at the bad guys, someone who cared about those hostages might track down the heroes. Or imagine the

scribing exactly what his hero is trying to do. Finally, the skill check should be a critical point in the story.
Never grant an increase of more
than one rank, and think carefully betore you give a free rank more than once for ay particular skill. At higher ranks, a skill rank increase may equal or even exceed the value
of attaining a new achievement
level.

Awarding Perks and Removing Flaws
You can reward spectacular effort or unforgettable roleplaying with new perks. For example, a hero who survives a long battle filled with moments of courage, sacrifice, and persistence could be given the Tough as Nails perk. A hero who risks his life for another out of goodwill and kindness may gain a new Powerful

New Ski Sometimes, a hero tries to use a skill he doesn't know anything about and succeeds despite his ignorance. If you think the hero clearly demonstrates a knowledge of the topic, or works through a tough situation that could teach him something about the skill, you can tell the player to note a new broad or specialty skill on his hero record sheet.

Ally.
Or, you can give a special reward 1o a character by removing a flaw. The Spineless hero who displays a `moment of crystallizing valor--and chimerical roleplaying--might find his cowardice suddenly a thing of the past.
These rewards should be rare in the extreme, occurring perhaps once in a hero's career.

ADVANCED players' chagrin if their heroes are
sued by a corporation for destroying

the alien-infested mining station instead of cleaning out the creatures.
On the other hand, heroes who consistently display valor, sacrifice, and thoughtfulness can find their reward not merely through some game-based award such as a skill or aperk. Instead, such heroes may gain permanent recognition and a place of honor in your campaign. Status, Money, and Rank

HEROES
Running high-level heroes can be a challenge for the Gamemaster and the players. Your job is to create new means and methods fo test the play-
ers and keep the game interesting.
Powertul, renowned heroes might take active roles in the major events of the campaign, getting involved in politics, diplomacy, and big business. If the players have applied themselves to advancing their he-

As the judge of your campaign, you have the right to change anything recorded on a hero sheet. A hero who captures a desperado may be enti-
tled to collect a bounty; this money
can be used to improve the hero's
personal equipment. Patents, claims, salvage fees, research grants, stock
options, and other such financial re-
wards might be bestowed upon a
hero by a grateful supporting character. A hero who turns over an alien artifact to his government might be

roes over many adventures, those
heroes can be rewarded with more important roles in the campaign.
On oceasion, a new hero joins @ group of experienced veterans. A player might have had an old hero killed off, or you might decide to ex`pand your gaming group. You can
allow these newcomer heroes to start
atlevel 3, level 5, or even higher in
order to keep the party relatively
balanced. See "Advanced Heroes" in Chapter 2: Hero Creation. In most

entitled to royailties on all devices
made with technology derived from
the find.

cases, the new hero shouldn't start at a higher level than the lowest-level
hero in the party.

Social status and military rank

rise through success. Promotion,
fame, and new friends among the

RETIREMENT

wealthy and powerful are symbols of The final aspect of heroic advance-

atise in status. It never hurts to be recognized as the fellow who saved the station from explosive decompression. If you choose to give a sta-

`ment and growth is the question of retirement. When is the challenge gone from a hero's career? Has he
won every award and laurel that's

tus increase as an achievement award, a hero's social level shouldn't rise more than one step at a time unless he comes into fantastic wealth

worth winning? It's up to you to determine the upper limit of character
level--both personal and social. The
ceiling may be as low as level 6 or

or fame. See "Social Status" in Chap-
ter 7: Attributes.

level 8 for low-powered campaigns or as high as level 20 or greater in

LRHssaomotfpreifnouagariacochrnslettetiirssvklcsloeo,uw,sslaosaehag.rfcooeCrtnairothotnaMsarnkk,rSgseaoooactsirrarnthnerastoeerioudssuzycplsmiad,oawtnliishsonsuiotbfanifblstee--eutrlsroopanmirtegfodrirt-elois-t--arytfgttuteiahiiprsronkeeeeinaIceansl.wtrtseWyombhpntoroieayeihruonscem'ersskemniestcoohesasntoveinmhars,ietergprymoahaaoasrosietsnugovra.danorcicyeeacs'mtsnsoih,nmeoocdciatvhopreievnacltnriarii.qsedmathuiwYceoeetonerttduirhhntstihecraoteiaethrrcnieer--

they're caught violating the organi- limelight is done.

aation's policies. In some cases, a hero might even be discharged from service, brought up on criminal

It's better to retire your favorite heroes gracefully instead of serializing
the story until the originality and the

charges, or relieved of his position. Taking equipment away from a
hero can be a story development. Of course, a hero might not go along with handing over his possessions, but that would make him a criminal, with further story developments.

thrill are gone. If the only thing that seems worthy of the heroes attention is one galactic catastrophe after another, if's time to think about winding up the storyline and starting with novice heroes again. Everyone en-

joys defeating the first alien armada--but how about the second, the

<

third, or the tenth? Even the most en-

thusiastic players will grow tired of saving the galaxy over and over.

b

Beginning anew with fresh char-

acters and localized problems is a great way to revitalize a game, giv-

ing players a chance to try out new

hero concepts and see a different

part of your campaign universe. Don't spring retirement on your

players. Tell them you're ready to see

anew batch of heroes, and give

SINIWIMIHIY

them a chance to wind up the business their heroes are involved in.

i necessary, you can offer to soft-

en the sting of retiring a hero by ask-

ing a player to come up with a

relationship or connection between his old hero and his new one. Maybe

anew hero s the child of an old one, or a distant descendant. Perhaps an

alien antifact owned by the previous hero finds its way into the hands of

the novice, a connection to grand old

tales of former glory. You might have

the old heroes appear in cameo roles s advisers, mentors, or movers and shakers in the campaign. Since they

were last seen, the old Free Agent

has accepted the position of intelli-

gence chief for the sector, and the Diplomat of the party is now a planetary governor. Players deserve to see

their favorite characters rewarded

for heroism and success.

113

laying involves imagination, r interaction, and group story
ng. Players don't simply interact with rules and the limited situations
define. They create. And the gest difference between other playing exercises and roleplay games--and the greatest ngth of roleplaying games--is presence of a moderator, called a gmemaster in the ALTERNITY game. Buide, referee. umpire. set designer, special effects technician, narrator, ally, opponent--the Gamemaster is all of these and more in a typical
toleplaying game session.
mDoaesster a Do?
, an admonition. The Game Br isn't competing against the layers. Unlike in other games, role
ing games don't have winners d losers. When the Gamemaster gnd players come together to tell an gciting and fun group story, every
˘ wins. The best game sessions e remembered for years to come.
Ifa roleplaying game were a ie, the players' heroes would be stars--the main characters of the
tory, The Gamemaster, then, is pro
ducer, director, screenwriter, set de Bigner, and the actor portraying all of fihe supporting cast and major vil joins. With interest and vision, being
GCamemaster 6an be rewarding,
allenging, and a lot of fun

TOhtheerGaHmaet:maMstoedr'esrataor
As moderator, the Gamemaster must interpret the rules in a fair, honest, and impartial manner. Of course, a good understanding of the rules is necessary. Set forth for your players which options and any changes you want to incorporate into play. When a situation arises that isn't covered by the rules, come up with a solution. Don't be afraid to ask your players for suggestions, but keep in mind that your decision is final, The ad
venture must go on, so it's your job to make aruling and get back to the ac tion of play.
BGefaomre e Sea ssion
A game session is one distinct peri
od of game play. It might take place on a Saturday afternoon, a Tuesday evening, or over an entire weekend. You may complete an entire adven
fure in one session, or the same ad venture might continue overa number of nights of play
Like the director of « theatrical play, you have a few things to do be
fore the lights go up on the game
gession. The first thing, after becom ing familiar with the rules in the Player's Handbook and this book, is
to decide what kind of science fiction setiing you're going to run. Will it be
a published setting? Or will you em ulate your favorite SF novel, movie, or TV show? Or will you put together a campaign world of your own imag
ining? Most Gamemasters use a combination of these to constructa setting. Refer 1o Chapter 13: Cam

paign Design for more ideas. The type of setting you build affects the kind of heroes your players create, the tone of adventures you run, and the style of play.

Prepare, Prepare,

Prepare

You need an adventure or a story idea before you gather your players

Although some Gamemasters

can

improvise, most need at least a col

lection of notes to work from. If you're using a published adventure, you need to read through it before
the game session begins, making

any alterations you deem necessary

so that it conforms to your setting and style of play.
When writing your own adven

tures, you'll need to put together the
adventure triggers, notes on supp ing cast characters, details on | tions the heroes might visit, and possibly an outline of the basic story you have in mind.

Remember, no matter how com

plete or extensive an outline you de

velop, a significant portion of the story isn`t in your hands. Roleplaying

is group storytelling, and a lot of

how the adventure unfolds depend

on the actions and ideas of the play ers and their heroes. With this in

mind, prepare accordingly, leaving

room for the players to develop cer

tain details through the course play. You won't be able to predict

everything that will happen and that's part of the fun. See Cha

Adventure Design for an overview of

how to plan an adventure, and how to create the parts of an adventure that you do have control over

115

The Game
Session
A In the first game session that starts

crets. By only describing the most important details, you can force the
players to draw their own conclu-
sions or to pick up the cues you want

the spot in response to a hero's actions. Don't worry about game statis-
tics or Ability Scores for these types of characters. In most cases, no dice

off your campaign, you need to establish a few parameters. You need
GRME to brief your players about the world your game is set in and how their he-

them to. For example, examine this description:

rolls will be required when interacting with them. If « dice roll is need-
ed, look in Chapter 6: Supporting
Cast for statistics of some general

roes fit into this world.

The airlock iris opens. The

types of supporting character tem-

Start by having the players intro-

emergency lighting provides

plates, or simply make up whatever

THE

duce their heroes. The best way for

them to do this is in character, but

don'tlet the players forget to de-

only {aint illumination and leaves behind more than a few shadows and dark corners, You

numbers you need. In the event that
heroes decide to try their Personality
skills on these minor cast members,

scribe what their heroes look like--

can see that the crew compart-

`most start out as Neutral to the he-

what they're wearing, the impression ment is @ mess. Books, ddta

of how they move, the way they canry disks, and a variety of tools

be RURNING themselves; all these things can

float about the main cabin, as

roes, unless you decide otherwise. On the other hand, important
members of the supporting cast re-

used to paint a visual picture of the

well as globules of crimson

quire more complete backgrounds,

heroes. In addition, you need to work out
the connections between the heroes.

liquid that drift like clouds in a calm sky. A single glove from an e-suit hangs near the ceil-

roleplaying notes, and full or partial
sets of game statistics. Build these
characters according to the role you

Do some o all of them know each other before the first adventure, or do they meet in the opening scene? Are they part of the same team, or a group of individuals brought together by circumstance? You can establish connections between the heroes

ing. The air is stale, with an indistinct, rotting smell that hovers on the edge of your senses. Three portals lead out of this cabin. Two are closed; the third one, to your right, is partially open, though the passage be-

think they're going to play in the story. An expert or specialist needs
enough statistics to apply his knowl-
edge for the heroes, while thugs and minor villains require enough skills and equipment to put up a fight. If these supporting characters survive

before the adventure begins, or just let the connections develop naturally during the initial adventure.

yond is dark. A barely perceptible clang sounds from behind one of the closed door

to become recurring members of the
cast, you can always add to their statistics and background details later.

More information on what goes

Major members of the supporting

into an adventure is covered in Chapter 15. The rest of this chapter gives you advice on how lo become the best Gamemaster you can be.

There's more than enough information provided in this description to spur the heroes to action, but nothing

cast deserve to be treated like he-
roes. They need Ability Scores, skills, equipment, goals, personality tags,
and even attitudes toward the he-

Create a Picture
In a roleplaying game, the action

they couldn't spot was mentioned.
The Gamemaster has given them
things to think about and a variety of

10es. Adversaries of this caliber need 10 be played logically, consistently,
and with panache.

scrolls across the mind's eye of the

options to choose from when they

Whether a supporting cast mem-

players. Anything you do to help

`make their first move. The players ber is a walk-on, a minor character,

players create an accurate picture of each scene makes the story more ex-

may come up with something unexpected, but chances are they'll de-

or a star-level adversary, play each as an individual. Roleplay! Nothing

citing and immediate.

cide to examine one of the clues.

makes a minor chardcter shine like

When you describe a scene, don't
tell the players just how it looks--tell Roleplay, Roleplay,

good roleplaying of a key feature,
and nothing ruins a major character

them what they smell, hear, and,

Roleplay!

like not roleplaying him to the hilt.

when appropriate, what they feel and taste. Describe everything from the heroes' point of view. I the he-

While every player controls one hero, the Gamemaster handles the
entire supporting cast. That means

Ham it up! Act it out! Make each character memorable for the role he
or she plays in a scene.

roes can't see what's behind a door, everyone from the nameless extras

Its important to keep a separation

don't tell them what's back there. The descriptive words you use should

and bit characters that fill out every campaign to the prominent allies.

show the players what their heroes sidekicks, adversaries, and major

between you as Gamemaster and
you as the person who represents the supporting cast. The characters you

can see and otherwise sense.

opponents that the heroes interact

run shouldn't know everything you

Never tell the players what their
heroes are doing--that's up to the players. Instead, show them the results of their actions.
Don't give everything away, of course. Hold back enough informa-

with. Most members of the support-
ing cast need to be described only by
a key word or a single detail that
helps you play a role. Some can even be improvised on the spot, especially when the heroes go someplace you

know, and you shouldn't make them into heroes that steal that stage rom the players. Be fair, and play each character for the specific role you envision for him or her. If the heroes have set a perfect ambush, then let

tion o get the players curious and

haven't developed.

the villain walk into it. If the heroes

thinking about questions of their
116own, Make the heroes active, working for subtle clues or hidden se-

Aclerk in a'store, a taxicab driver, `@ minor burecucrat, or a man in the street might have to be made up on

make a good bluff, let them fool the border guard.

Both techniques get the job done. Work with the voice you're most comfortable with. Using first-person or second-person voice allows for a deeper connection between player and character, and brings out more drama in the moment. But if you're uncomiortable with the theatrics of roleplaying, just sum up the informa-
tion and let the players get to the
part of the game that matters for you cnd them--combat, challenges, and puzzle-solving.

Set the Right Mood

Every setting has a specific mood, depending on what genre of science fiction it seeks to emulate. Establishing that mood can help the players

`maintain their characterizations and
visualize the scenes described to them. Some adventures can change

ACTION VS. STYLE
Every Gamemaster has his or her own style. Some people play the game by the book, relying on the rules and guidelines of the system to figute out what happens next. Others don't open any books during the whole session of play, figuring

Gamemaster: "This is a long corri-
dor, with a lot of heavy damage.
There are broken power conduits, shattered decking, scorch marks on the walls and ceiling, and debris on
floor. What's Sergeant Grimes going
todo?"
Player: "Grimes draws his mass
pistol and advances down the hallway. He's looking out for trouble."

the tone and mood of the setting for a
brief time--think of your favorite television dramas that sometimes
use comedy to create a change of
pace--but in general you should keep the mood constant so the play-
ers stay immersed in the story.
The way you describe scenes, play supporting cast members, and make information available to the players reinforces the mood of your setting. If your campaign is an epic

that it's not worth interrupting the
story to find out the wording of the rules. You'll have to learn from experience which style works best for you.
Most Gamemasters interact with the players in second-person voice while narrating the details of a scene, referring to the hero and playetas "you." The player responds in first-person voice, identifying his hero as "L." Here's an example of second-person and first-person voice:
Gamemaster: "You see a long cor-

There isn't a great deal of difference in game styles for narrative scenes like this one. Some players are un-

space operda, then your descriptions
should be larger than life, your supporting characters good or evil, and

comiortable with trying to speak in their character's voice--they'd rather
stay a little detached from the role-
playing by referring to their heroes

your presentation straightforward.
If your campaign instead tells a dark and gritty tale of the near future, then your descriptions need to

in the third person.

convey that attitude with an oppres-

You often have to portray a villain or & supporting character the heroes
are interacting with. You can actual-
ly speak your supporting character's

sive air that infects the heroes. Your
supporting cast members need to be hard, tough, and fatalistic, and the information you present should be

lines and let the players sort things

full of twists and turns to foster a

out for themselves, o you can simply mood of isolation and unease.

sum up what the supporting charac-

ridor, with a lot of heavy damage.
Thete are broken power conduits, shattered decking, scorch marks on the walls and ceiling, and debris scattered on the floor. What are you going to do?"
Player: "I ready my mass pistol and sneak down the hallway, keep-

ter has to say:
Gamemaster (as informent): "I
heard that there's something going
on down at the docks tonight. Gared's expecting a shipment, and all his goons are going to be there."

MthoederaStintgory
You're the moderator, and your word is law. You decide which optional rules are in play. and you settle any
questions concerning "the reality" of your setting.

ingmy eyes peeled."

Breu

Of course, you need to be fair and

impartial; otherwise, your players

For a different flavor, the Gamemaster and the player can use third person, and the scene will seem

Gamemaster

four informant

could wind up angry and frustrated.

tells you that Gared's expecting a

Reasonable players won't mind if

shipment down on the docks tonight. you make rulings that don't favor

more detached, Sometimes third-person voice is useful for that reason:

Alot of his men
there."

are

going to be

their heroes, as long as you act con-
1 sistently and in an objective manner.

Apply the same standards to the supporting cast.
Remember, you're in control of the campaign and the game. Provide a challenge so that a good story can be told, but don't view yourself as the players' opponent. And give the players a break every now and then. Its no fun for a player to have a favorite hero killed, especially in a manner that he had no control over. If a hero is taking unusual risks or acting in a manner that goes against
self-preservation, then serious harm
should follow. A hero wha dices with death on a regular basis should meet the fate that's coming to him.

Relax!
1t's a gamel There aren`t any tests, and no one will hold it against you if
you make a mistake or two along the
way. Learn the rules in stages, adding mechanics as you and your players need them.
Be entertaining, and allow the players to entertain you. Ham it up,

play it straight, go for the dramatic--

whatever's appropriate for the scene,

the setting, and the story you've set

out to tell.
You and the players have come to-
gether to tell a group story, using the
language and conventions of a roleplaying game. Use the rules as you see fit, but use them to help you tell
the story--not to hinder the way the
story unfolds.
Keep Things Moving!
Gamemasters should feel free to use any of the following methods for keeping the action going, the story flowing, and the game fun.
» Make It Up: Improvisation is one

of the most important skills « Game- well-planned sets might not be as

master can learn. carefully you plan

No or

matter how

finished

how completelyhad set

and complete as what you up, but that's okay. Go with

you outline, the heroes will wander the flow until you can get the heroes

from your "schedule." They'll go

back to a scene you've prepared. You

someplace you hadn't even considered to talk to someone you hadn't

may have to make slight adjustments, but chances are you can use

even thought of. What happens next? what you've planned in some fash-

That depends on what you make up. ion, no matter how far afield the he-

Begin by describing a few details roes wander.

about the new location and who's

» Wing It: When the adventure

there. Use the reactions of the play- starts to take off, nobody wants to

ers to spur more ideas. What's be-

break out of the roleplaying by stop-

hind your well-decorated and

ping to check the rules. That's the

best time to simply wing it. Roll

some dice and move on.

When Your Heroes Split Up

For example, if a hero wants to see if an enemy's weapon has any

ammo left, have the hero make a Per-

sonality feat check to see how lucky he is. If the heroes ask if @ specific

item can be found in the room they're

searching (but not an item connected
to the main plot of the adventure), make a guess at the odds of the item being there and roll a die.
» Ignore the Rules: When you decide that a specific rule should be bent or ignored for the sake of the story, that's the way it is. Sometimes you'll use dice to setile a question, other times you'lllet roleplaying and the needs of the story dictate how events unfold.

Mystic, martial artist, trader, and doctor

Ending a Session
Sometimes a game session will stop in the middle of an adventure. In
such a case, bring it to a close with
your players wanting more--on a clifthanger. Will the heroes make it this time? Will the villain get away?
Tune in next time.
Aiter the session in which the adventure comes to a conclusion, talk to your players. Find out what they liked, and why. Ask them where they think the campaign is headed. They might give you an idea or two that you can incorporate into the next adventure you design
This is also a good time to ask the players about what their characters may be planning. Their answers will help you develop future sessions s well as respond to your players' goals.
Keeping Records
Being a Gamemaster means being in possession of--and in control of--a large body of information. Keeping this information organized and up to
date is critically important to run-
ning action-filled game sessions--

your players aren't going to want to wait while you rummage through a stack of paper to find the map of the
spaceport their heroes have just en-
tered. In addition to maintaining notes
on the supporting cast and specific locations in your campaign setting,
you need to keep track of events and actions that occur and could come
into play again in future sessions.
This sort of record-keeping is especially important for mysteries that slowly unravel, and for recurring plots and characters.
Its also a good idea for you to keep an up-to-date copy of each players hero sheet. Having ready access to'the heroes' skill scores, for in-
stance, makes it possible for you to
toll secret skill checks without having to tip your hand by asking a player what his hero's Awareness~
intuition score is.
Campaign Calendar
Many Gamemasters enjoy developing a fictional calendar and a timeline for their setting. By putting the heroes into a setting that has a histo1y, you may realize opportunities for adventure. The warlike empire was

defeated seven years ago? Maybe

they're preparing a retaliatory strike. The comet will strike the planet's surface in three months? The heroes

better invent a device to deflect the

comet--soon!

Creating special dates and anniversaries for your campaign helps

to foster a sense of realism. Why mark holidays? If you can tell your

players that they've landed on Laxa

IV on Liberation Day, your players will naturally fill in the surroundings with their own expectations of what

it would be like.

Advance the calendar as you see

fit. If the heroes have to wail three weeks for the next driveship to come

by, then those three weeks pass; just

tell the players, "It's three weeks

later ..." and mark the new date. Events that commonly advance a

campaign setting's calendar include:

» Traveling for longer than one

day

» Periods of research, analysis,

preparation, or training on the he-

roes' part

» Incarceration or legal troubles

» Special story events or charac-

ter developments

119

! SCcENE
P STRUCTURE N A scene can be anything from a

Closing a Scene
Sooner or later, every scene ends. The adventure moves on. Avoid scenes that run on for more than ten

tense negotiation in a conference rounds of combat, require dozens of

GAME 100m to a battle of dreadnoughts dice rolls, or embroil the heroes in hurling energy at each other. While conversations that never end. If you

these examples might not seem to

find that a scene is dragging on,

`have much in common, all scenes

don't be afraid to wrap things up.

THE `have the same basic components.

Betore you end a scene, give the

There's an opening, in which the he- players a chance to pursue their ob-

roes see what's happening; an oppor- jective in the scene and witness the

rigging the experimental singularity
probe, call it an interlude and skip
over the intervening time.
During short interludes, don't wor-
ty about what every hero is doing.
Anyone can maintain equipment,
read, or socialize in the local cafe. has Try to ensure that every hero
something to do during a long interlude, though: players get bored when | they think their heroes are sitting around doing nothing!

tunity for action, in which the heroes results: success, failure, or tie. The

CHALLENGES can affect the adventure; and a clos- players need to know if they've got a

ing, which ends the scene.

lead to work with, if they can go on

RUNING

to the next step of the adventure, or if A challenge scene is one in which

Opening a Scene

they're going to have to retrace their steps and try again.

hero tests his skills or abilities in a contest--a cliff to be climbed, a

A scene can begin in any way you

bomb to be defused, or just about

The Interlude can imagine, but at a minimum you
need to tell the players where their

anything that doesn't involve combat or interaction.

heroes are, what they're doing, and Stringing together scenes raquires

Presented here are guidelines for

what their surroundings are. Here's attention and imagination on your creating and running physical and

an example of an opening:

pat. Think of an adventure as an action movie. Not every moment of the

mental challenges, Often, your judgment is the deciding factor in deter-

heroes' existence is on film. There mining how long a challenge takes,

You kick open the door and see what appears to be a lab. In the room are long tables
cluttered with scientific apparatus, a big computer console
on the far wall, and a weird

are sequences in which the heroes review their options, make preparations, travel, or wait for the right time to strike, These scenes-that-aren'tscenes are called interludes.
Some groups derive satisfaction from the roleplaying interaction

how difficult it is, and what the re-
sults are.
Each challenge you place in front of the heroes has at least one challenge path--the route by which a hero can overcome the challenge by using his skills or abilities. A chal-

between heroes, and interludes be- lenge path is defined by its complex-

tween scenes are excellent times for ity (the number of successes required

players to compare what they've observed and devise plans for complet-

to complete it), its time frame (the
rate at which heroes can atiempt

ing the adventure. You might spend skill checks to overcome the chal-

much of your time involved in these off-screen sequences while repre-

lenge), and its risk (the consequence of failure).

The next thing the Gamemaster will senting the supporting cast.

Most challenges fall into one of

say is "What do you do now?" Noth- A few examples of interludes:

five general categaries: reasoning,

ing has forced the heroes to choose
one strategy over another; they can

endurance, hazards and traps, obsta» & period of travel during which cles, and technical challenges.

try to talk to the guards, retreat out of the heroes spend most of the time

the room, or blast away.
Action Action is the meat of the scene. Heroes and supporting cast members may interact with one another in any

getting from one point to another » A long challenge, such as an
analysis of evidence, a scientific ex-
periment, or a research project
» A rest period in the middle of an adventure
> A period of training, resupply-

Challenge Paths
Most challenges can be approached in more than one way. Heroes trying 1o defuse a bomb might disarm it, hack into its electronic brain, or jury1ig a robot to carry the bomb away.

number of ways: in cooperation, opposition, or competition. The rules in the Players Handbook and in this book for resolving actions cover most
situations, but you make the game
your own by improvising, expanding

ing, or recovery away from the imme-
diate threat
Interludes allow you to control the {low of time in the game, If it's important o the adventure for a couple of

When you're preparing a challenge, take « moment to think up the likely responses and prepare a challenge path for each,
Some approaches may be more appropriate than others. Reflect this

the action to meet your needs.

weeks to go by before the heroes get foct by assigning penalties or bonus-

Once the scene has begun, anything goes. You've prepared for what the heroes are likely to do, but ex-
120pect to be surprised by your players' imaginative responses to situations.

their next lead, use an interlude to
account for the heroes' time and at-
tention while you're setting the stage for the next scene of the adventure. If
the heroes are busy for three months

es to certain courses of action. Rig-
ging a robot in only a few minutes might be difficult, possibly a +2 or +3 penalty. On the other hand, the bomb might be easy to disarm, giving a-2

=
D
INIRNY JHL THED

bonus. Or it could by a demolitions

be boobytrapped expert, giving a +4
sarm attempts.

scribed by the numb
hero must obtain in c
plete the job. A sim tempting to jump ac only a single skill che find the cure for an unkno

chanic for ex

j

Refer to Chapter 4: Skills for more i

formation on complex skill chec

Caombat between corvettes

challenge, work may not be continu

ous. For example, a prisoner digging

s way out of his cell might work for just a couple of hours each night, but

he's making prc

situation, a hero might be able to en
gage in several challenges at the same time.

BLE G27: {ALLENG

)

or guidelines in determining
nterval between individual

parts of a complex skill check. For example, you might decide that a hero modifying a computer program

finish the job, the check every 6 hours until he
successes.

The danger caused by failure during

a challenge depends on the nature of

the challenge. Some

ho fails to

make it over a chasm with a running

leap faces the prospect of a long and

Time frame defines how often skill checks can be made to accumulate successes. During a slowmoving
challenge--for example, conducting painstaking scientific research--a character might be allowed to mo only one check per week. In compari
son, a hero trying to jump a fence
ther succeeds or fails in a single phase of the action round.
When a hero is engaged in a long

10 seconds
1060 seconds
110 minutes
1060 minutes
112 hours
1248 hours 27 days 760 days

1/phase 1/round 1/minute 1710 min.
1/hour
1/6 hours
V/day
1T/week

Athletic feat

Picking
Setting

aa

tlroacpk

Temporary repairs

Climbing a large cliff

Permanent repairs

Minor construction

Extended journey

= unpleasant fall, while a hero who botches the job of defusing a bomb could cause an explosion. Many

ing around to examine the scene or grilling the prospective contact.

a door that opens beneath a hero's
feet, or a shaky ledge that gives way
when the hero puts his weight on it.

b
GAME

challenges can inflict damage, and others may imperil a hero in other `ways--the loss of possessions, the onset of a disease, o a complication in the story that resulls from his failure to complete the challenge.

» Challenge Path: Skills commonly used in reasoning challenges include Business, Knowledge, Law, any Science, Administration, Interaction, and Investigation.
» Complexity: Simple or obvious

The challenge path for a hazard or
trap usually begins with a hero mak-
ing a feat check or a skill check, which measures how negatively the trap affects him. Well-made traps may offer substantial penalties to

problems require 1 success. Subtle or the hero's skill check, and deadly

THE Reasoning Challenges

concealed successes.

information requires 3-5 Extremely subtle informa-

ones may indlict serious damage Ordinary or Good results.

on

tion might require 6-8 successes.

After the trap activates, the hero

When a hero must use wits or train-

» Time Frame: Minutes.

may face additional steps in the

ing to arrive at a conclusion, he

RUNHING

faces a reasoning challenge. On occasion, a hero has knowledge that his or her player doesn't possess; for

Endurance Challenges

challenge path. He may have to climb out of a pit, disarm the dart throwers, or recover what's left of his computer files before continuing.

example, a starship commander knows more about astrogation and

Extended physical activity or a bat-
tle against the elements may be re-

Heavy Falling Things

starship engineering in the context flected by an endurance challenge. Heroes at risk of being crushed by

of the adventure than any player. The Fact Check

Endurance challenges involve the loss of stun o fatigue points.
Anytime a hero is faced with the

falling stones, toppling trees, or other large objects from above should
get an Awareness check in order to

A reasoning challenge can be

threat of freezing, heat exhaustion, spot the danger before it strikes. A

played as a fact check. Think of this suffocation, drowning, or death by

penalty may be applied if the trap is

as aroll to see if the heroes happen to recall a portion of their specialized knowledge that applies to the

the forces of nature, have the player make a Stamina-endurance check for his character to see how long he

well constructed. Once the trap is sprung, damage inflicted depends on the victim's Dexterity feat check.

situation. For example, if you tell the can hold out. This is a special kind of Compare the weight and speed of

players that their herces have encountered « spatial anomaly, you

challenge that comes into play when the object to @ normal fall and use

a hero s trying to hold up against

the damage for falling as a guide.

might allow each character to at-

something that can exhaust or kill

See "Falling" in Chapter 3.

tempt a reasoning challenge using him over time.

Physical Science-astronomy to gain a glimpse into what they're facing.

The two basic kinds of endurance challenges are exposure challenges,

Obstacles

» Challenge Path: Any skill.

which cause stun damage; and exhaustion challenges, which cause fa-

» Complexity: Simple (1 success). tigue damage. More information on

» Time Frame: Instantaneous.

running these challenges can be

Quick Judgment

found in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in
Action.

The second common use of reason-

ed all fall into this category.

ing challenge involves making a

Overland Movement

An obstacle may have a lengthy

snap judgment about a situation or

Heroes who stroll, march, or force

challenge path requiring a number

transaction. In this type of challenge. march for hours must make Stami- of successes. Unlike in an endurance

a hero examines the evidence and

na-endurance checks to avoid suf- challenge, successes against an ob-

information he can gather with his

fering fatigue damage: see

stacle measure progress over time.

wits and senses, looking for things

3. ""Movement" in Chapter

Although an obstacle is not innately

that don't fit. A detective making a cursory examination of a crime

Hostile Environments

dangerous, a hero who runs into trouble along the way can be hurt--

scene and an undercover officer
evaluating a new contact are ex-

Exposure to hostile conditions repre- consider a rock climber who rolls a sents an endurance challenge, too. Critical Failure haliway up a 100-

amples of heroes trying to make a quick judgment.

Depending on the exact conditions, meter cliff, or a swimmer who tires `hero might have to check for stun or haltway across ariver.

You can decide that 1 success produces a basic fact, and 4 successes. produce insight into the problem at
hand, but a hero needs 7 successes

fatigue damage over the course of hours, minutes, rounds, or phases.
See "The GRAPH System" in Chapter
3for details.

Obstacles offer the most possibilities for alternate challenge paths. For example, heroes conironted by a locked door have several options

to discern a subtle clue. The more

open to them--picking the lock,

Hazards Traps time and effort a hero spends on the
challenge, the more likely it is that @

&

bashing the door down, or setting a charge o blast it open.

10 secret will be found. In short, a hero A trap is a challenge that attacks its can make a better judgment by stick- victim--a poison needle in « handle,

=
D
SHINNNY
JHL
JHHD

=} `(\
Bounty hunter, ambassador, law enforc er, and brawler

Doors & Se Devices Alocked door, electronic vault key
pad, and similar types of controlled access can stop the heroes in their tracks. The most common skills for dealing with a challenge of this sort
are Manipulation, Computer Sci
ence, and Security. Picking a lock or
rewiring a keypad is a moderately complex task, and may require a
greater number of successes for
advanced locks. A time frame of
rounds or minutes is appropriate, al
though extremely advanced security systems may take hours to crack.
Walls, Fences, & Cliffs
The challenge path for scaling a physical barrier is usually Athletics
climb, although heroes might think
of other ways to get around or over
the obstacle. The complexity and time frame of the challenge depend on the length of the climb.
When a hero fails a climb skill
check, he doesn't automatically
plummet to his death. Allow him a
Dexterity feat check to catch himself on something, although he may re
quire assistance to get out of the
predicament.

Technical Challenges
A technical challenge involves using skills in working toward a specific goal--trying to hack into the enemy mainframe, repair a damaged star drive, synthesize an antidote, or re store another character to health.
There's an astounding variety of ways in which heroes could meet a technical challenge. Refer to the
guidelines for "Complexity" and
"Time Frame" presented at the be
ginning of this section. The descrip tions in Chapter 4: Skills may present some options for specific challenges.
Analysis & Research
Heroes digging up information by a thorough study of the facts at hand are engaged in this kind of chal lenge. Administration, Investigate, and Science skills prove the most useful during analysis or research challenges. You may assign a penal
ty to the skill checks to measure how
hard it is to come up with a useful
observation given the sources. The complexity reflects how many facts must be compiled in order to arrive at a conclusion. The time frame de

pends on the amount of source mate rial and the hero's means of access.
® Example: Ace reporter Scoops
Doogan is looking through the city's property records to find out who owns the mysterious warehouse. Ad ministration and Investigate are two reasonable skills to use. The Game master decides that tracking down a
normal record would require only 1 success, but the villains have set up a couple of layers of shadow owner ship, so Doogan needs 3 successes to
wade through it all. The records are crammed into paper files without any organization, so the Game
master decides that Scoops can try
one skill check per hour.
˘ Example: Super physicist An drei Varakov is investigating the site of a wrecked asteroid colony, looking for any evidence of odd physical phenomena. He uses a sensor device to take readings and then retires to the ship's lab to examine his find ings, using his Physical Science skill. The Gamemaster decides to
make this a difficult challenge, giv
ing each of Varakov's checks a +2 penalty. Since Varakov needs to cor relate and plot a number of readings,
and then look through some high

123

= brow and radical theories, this task requires 6 successes. With the re

sources of the lab and the ship's

b

computer, Varakov can make skill

checks once per hour. Without them,

he would make checks once per day.

Computers
GAME
Using the computer as an aid to re

search or investigation allows the

THE

hero to add the computer's bonus to

his own skill check--which could be

Investigate, Knowledge, or any Sci

ence. But a hero using the Computer Science skill to gain access to an enemy computer, craft a virus, or RUANING write a program is engaged in a spe

cific kind of technical challenge. When a hero is hacking into an
enemy system, the computer's securi

ty program governs the challenge

difficulty. Usually, the hacker must

first bypass or defeat the security be

fore doing what he came to do. Refer

to the rules in the Player's Handbook

for security complexity and difficulty. Creating a program or repairing
damage to a computer's software is more timeconsuming. The quality of the program affects the hero's skill

checks, and the length of the pro gram governs the successes needed.

It might only take a few minutes or hours to modify an existing program, but coding a major program should take weeks or months.

14

Medical Using medical skills to treat an in jured character is a technical chal lenge. Medical treatment is covered in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action and Chapter 4: Skills.
Repairs A hero might try to fix anything from an engine with a thrown rod to a de fective stardrive. The quality of the tools and resources available modi fies the challenge difficulty--it's eas ier to fix a bent axle in a body shop than out in the middle of nowhere. The extent of the damage is reflected by the complexity of the challenge-- correcting a minor problem may only require 1 success, but fixing a big problem could require 8 successes.
Repair times can vary, depending on the availability of spare parts, the accessibility of the damaged areq, and whether or not any machining, manufacturing, or programming is necessary to get everything back on line. Generally, the type of damage govems the time frame of the re pairs. Repairing stun damage takes minutes or hours, but fixing mortal damage takes days or weeks.
ENCOUNTERS
Heroes might be able to shoot their way out of trouble or invent nifty de vices to circumvent their enemies, but sooner or later they'll need to in teract with the world around them. An encounter can involve speaking, dealing, or persuading: an interroga tion, a business transaction, an emo tional appeal, or a veiled threat. Encounters are sources of informa tion, assistance, and entertainment for the heroes and their players.
Encounters are the dialogue of an adventure. They help you to deliver crucial materials, support, or knowl edge to the players. Roleplaying is the best chance for the players to showcase their heroes. Some chal lenging adventures consist of noth ing but encounters, as the heroes puzzle out a mystery, arrange an al liance, or make contact with a hard toreach person.
The encounter rules presented here and in the Player's Handbook are tools for your use. An encounter table (Table P25) is provided not to deprive anyone of the pleasure of roleplaying, but to give you a meth od of approximating the response of

the supporting cast when you're not sure how theyreact to the heroes. As always, feel free to ignore the results of any table and roleplay characters and situations as you desire.
Encounter Paths
As with a challenge, you can consid er an encounter to have certain de fining characteristics. The path is your plan for the encounter. Consider which skills the heroes are likely to use in dealing with this character or situation, and decide how these dif ferent tactics are likely to work.
Of course, you don't really know what a hero's going to say or do be fore he does it, but you can make some guesses. It's reasonable to ex pect that a Combat Spec might try to intimidate a smartmouthed punk, while a Free Agent might try to get him to open up to negotiations, and the gorgeous Diplomat could flirt with the street rat and overpower him with her presence. Knowing your players and the way they like to portray their heroes is an advantage in planning an encounter.
Based on what you expect the he roes to do or say to secure the sup porting character's cooperation, you can set up several possible encoun ter paths and outcomes. A guard might just stand aside if bribed or in timidated, but if the heroes charm or deceive him, he could volunteer criti cal information or even accompany the party to help them along.
Difficulty
In addition to providing information or cooperation, some tactics may be easier or harder to apply than others. This is reflected by the difficulty of an encounter challenge. The basic measure of encounter difficulty is the prospective target's resistance modi fier--his force of Will or the level of his Intelligence. Refer to TasLE P10: SkiLLs & RESISTANCE MODIFIERS on page 35. Assign additional modifiers based on the situation.
® Example: An extremely strong willed guard (resistance modifier of +2 steps) might be hard to intimidate or charm, but he could be unusually greedy and susceptible to bribery, granting a hero a 1 bonus to the use of this skill. The skill check is made with a +1 penalty.
Preparing for an encounter by studying the target and learning

how to push his buttons is a smart precaution, and might provide the hero with an edge in negotiations.

gate generally takes a fair amount of time to sway a supporting character or complete the objective of the encounter challenge.

Resolution

It's not important to keep track of
just how long an encounter takes.

A single skill check is all that's nec- Keep the scene going for as long as

essary to resolve most encounter

the players want--if they're still ask-

challenges. Compare the target

ing questions or discussing the situ-

character's attitude toward the hero ation in character, there's no need to

with the result of the hero's skill check, and consult TABLE P25: ENin COUNTER SkaLL. EFFECTS on page 96

step in and end the encounter until
the players and the supporting char-
acters have nothing more to say to

the Player's Handbook. It's important each other.

to remember that Hostile characters

aren't always enemies. For example, Extended Encounters

a negotiator sitting actoss the table The average encounter is the subject

from a hero might be regarded as

of a single scene. But sometimes he-

Hostile, since he's trying to get the

roes may want to spend days or

`most out of a deal while paying the weeks "working on" a supporting

least amount possible.

character, especially if nothing else

Use your judgment when roleplay- is happening. For example, trying to

ing supporting cast members during seduce someone with ten minutes of

encounters. Apply penalties to en-

witty conversation and sparkling

counter skills as you feel appropri- personality can be tough--but if the

ate; in any event, you can set aside the result of any dice roll.

hero has several days on a cruise Liner to get close to the subject of his

attentions, his odds improve. Use a

Time Most encounters take less than ten

complex skill check as described below.
First, set an opening attitude for

minutes. Either the hero manages to pass the bribe, charm the object of

the subject (Hostile, Neutral, or Friendly). Each day, the character

`his affection, or lie to get out of trou-
ble--or he doesn't. Think of an en-

can make a skill check to see how he has fared in changing the subject's

counter as one scene in a movie;
even extensive dialogue doesn't go on for much longer than ten minutes or 50. Some encounter scenes may take even less time; bluifing or intimidating someone may be accomplished with one strongly worded statement and a steely glare.
One-liners take no longer than a single phase. Deception-bluff and

attitude. An Ordinary result counts as 1 success, a Good result counts as 2 successes, and an Amazing counts as 3 successes. Six successes can
shift the subject's attitude by one category (Neutral to Friendly, for exam-
ple), 12 more will shift it a second category, and 24 beyond that will shift it a third category. Its a long and hard task to bring about radical

Interaction-intimidate are encounter
skills that can be pulled off as oneliners.
Brief speeches require anywhere

shifts in a subject's attitude.
Example: Agent Albright has to
`win the trust of the boss of a street
gang. He's undercover as a new re-

from a round to about a minute to

cruit, but the leader's right-hand man

achieve results. Leadership-inspire and Interaction-taunt can be used

`hates the as Hostile

new kid's face--he starts toward the detective. Al-

for brief speeches. Simple transactions take from one
to five minutes to complete. Encoun-

bright decides that he must win the lieutenant's respect before he can getclose to the leader, so he works to

ters using Business, Administration, convince the gangster that he's com-

Street Smant, or Interaction-bargain pletely loyal to the gang by using his

fall into this category. Some impor-

Entertainment-act skill. After accu-

tant transactions and negotiations, such as corporate acquisitions, can
drag on for weeks or months. Conversations last anywhere from

mulating 6 successes over a few days, he shifts the lieutenant's attitude to Neutral.

afew minutes to a few hours. The

use of Culture, Entertainment, Inter-
action-seduce or Investigate-interro-

Dice and
Roleplaying

=

An encounter scene blurs the line be- B tween mechanics and roleplaying. This is all right! Anytime the players. are willing to act out what their heroes say and how they try to influ-
ence the supporting characters, encourage them to do so. You don't
SHINANYE
have to include any skill checks in an encounter scene if the heroes'
words and actions dictate a particu- JH1 lar response.
® Example: A drunken thug tries 1o pick a fight. If one hero eggs him
on while another hero tries to calm IWGD `him down, you can decide that the
thug goes after the hero who's taunting him, regardless of any success the peacemaker gets. Use your common sense--a space marine in battle
armor isn't going to be able to draw a cowardly clerk into a fistfight, no
`matter what the player says or what
result the hero achieves on his Inter-
action-taunt skill check.

When Talking Doesn't Work

Despite the heroes' most persuasive
arguments and delightful personali ties, eventually they'll run across villains and supporting characters who aren't interested in what they have to say. When the heroes don't have anything that could possibly interest the subject of the encounter, or atter they say or do things that the subject views as threatening or hostile, its impossible for the heroes to change
the subject's attitude. The subject
has made up his or her mind about how to respond.
Mild-mannered supporting characters may politely excuse themselves from the conversation. If the
heroes are threatening, the subject
may call for law enforcement, bouncers, or even a passerby. In a pinch, the subject may flee by whatever means are available.
More aggressive characters may decide that the conversation should
take a violent turn. When one side
decides to attack in the middle of an encounter scene, allow the oppo-
nents an Awareness-intuition check
to see if they anticipate the hostile

reaction. Treat this as a normal sur-
prise check (see Chapter 3: Game`masters in Action), and follow with action checks for the first round.

123

The galaxy is constantly in motion, and so are most
heroes. While some of your adventures may take place entirely within a single building or even a particular room, most adventures find heroes flinging from one
end of the world to another. Chapter 12: Vehicles in the
Player's Handbook lists vehicle models and their
statistics. In this chapter, vehicular accessories, weapons, and expanded rules further
explore vessels that travel on the
land, sea, or air.

System

Descriptions

Almost any device from the personal

{ed-with-a-vaziety of acces-
fscriss, vehiclos adapt fo roles of

equipmsnt listcan be fitted to a vebicle. Unless hero takes this to ex-

treme lengths (for example, trying to mount one of everything in @ com

Nebicle--if o hero wonts o portable Workshop emd-cutting torch in the
ol o truck, all that's necessary is fibe money for both: However, some ocessories camoniy be mounted on B vehicls of some kind, and aren't Siifable for personal use. These are

pact eax), allhe has to do is spend
the money-and mark it dow ona vehicle record sheet. If necessary, as-
sume that any item from the person-
al equipment lists weighing more than 8 kg uses 1 point of durability when installed within a vehicle.
You or yourplayers may become

[ Wehicular accessories.

Interested in an accessory that isn't

Vehicular accessories often r

described below. There's no reason

ulie Gsupport, bracing. or custom you can'tadd to the systems listed

Biounting: Toetlect the fact that

here. If there's an ifem you think is

some yehicles can carry more gear

reasonably available in your cam-

them others, each vehicle's durability paign, go ahead and create it

ating. equal o its number of morial

Ablative Module (PL 8): This abla-

boxes, represents the number of sys- tive defensive system is a larger,

istns that can be installed. Some ve-

more durable version of the personal

hicular systems are too large or too ablative hamess. The system pro-

heavy for smaller vehicles.

vides 50 points of protective energy.

Forpurposes of customizing a ve- Every pointof mortal damage weak-

hicls, essume that a suitable body, ens the field by 3 points, every point

chassis, engine, and other normal

of wound damage weakens the field

details--such as a sound system. by 2 points; and every point of stun

ldoors and windows, and spare

damagé weakens the field by |

fies--are included in the basic

point. When the module's energy is

price. You don'thave o pay extra to reduced to 0 or fewer points, the pro-

getwings for your hero's plane, or

tectivefield collapses. Recharging at

fires-faryour hero's car, However, un. usisl aystems such as the ones described below have-ahelty price tag

`@ power source requires one hour per 10 points of field energy.
Birtight configuration (PL 5): The

atlached, and may not be commonly vehicle is sealed for airtight opera-

available.

tion, and includes an airlock for
entry. Usually, this feature is chosen

{or vehicles that will operate in un-
usual or poisonous corrosive atmospheres. Airlocks can double as

decontamination stations. Should an
airtight configured vehicle lose ils

ability to recycle air,

assume that it

can contain enough man-hours of air
equal to its durability rating Camoutlager (PL 8): Using imc
recognition and photoreactive mat
rials, the camouflager allows a vehicle to blend into its surroundings. Although the vehicle c n be spotted by its radar, heat, or other sensors, it's hard to see with the naked eye. At any distance greate than 10 meters, an individual uc ly searching for the ve cle sutfers o +2 penalty to his Awarer tion check.
Camping module (L 5): This ac cessory includes panels or compart ments that stow a portable ca n A
vehicle's camping module
than the personal version, and includes a cabin measuring 3 meters wide and 6 meters long, with s1

ing facilities for six. Purchas

of these modules give
lent of a camper att canopy the bed of a pickup truck. Purchasing two or more o hese modules r ders the vehicle into @ mobile h

`Communication

suite (PL 5)

communication cons0:le may be con

nected to several communication

devices, including a radio (PL 5

or comm gear (PL 7), an orbital up-

link, a cellular phone, a mass trans

ceiver (PL 7). an emergency beacon,

and a GPS receiv or inertial com-

pass. The comm suite'sransceivers

are

more
ons,

apnowd eprfoulsstheantwhicaentdh-h

range of hand-held device

Deflection module (PL 7 larger

17 version of the deflectioanrness,

this powerful screen is designed to

»--[--)

protect power

a vehicle. weapons,

Against Good fireit adds +2 to the ve-

hicle's resistance modifier against

enemy vehicular attacks, making it

System

Dur Avai Cost

harder to hit. Against Ordinary fire-

Ablative module

40K

power weapons such as most personal weapons, the system adds +4 to the vehicle's resistance modifier. Finally, against larger, Amazing fireUEHICLES power weapons, the module increases the vehicle's resistance modifier

Airtight config.

T

Camouflager

Camping module O T
Comm suite

Deflection module

SK
BK 3K

by +1. The deflection module pro-

[

RO

vides no defense against collisions. or crashes
ECM pod (PL 5): This defensive device detects and jams enemy radar transmissions, It functions as an EM detector and can also block incom-

T

Ejection system

T

EM detector

Excavation gear

T

Hi-power engine

I

IR detector

ing radar signals. The ECM pod is

Mass detector

also useful against missile guidance systems and fire control radars. The pilot or operator rolls a System Operation-communications skill check to use the ECM. The result provides a modifier to an enemy's sensor

ROV
Medical suite

Performance pack (LT

Radar

search Air/Space

T

NP=~CONOMO~ON=W=WN ==

checks, or the attack roll of a guided

Multiband

missile: Critical Failure, -1 bonus Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, +1 penalty; Good, +2 penalty; Amazing, +3 penalty.
Ejection system (PL 5): This accessory is a standard option for military

Surface search ROV

Remote console I

Rescue gear

T

Salvage gear T
Science suite

vessels, but can be equipped on any moden vehicle, including landbased ones. The ejection system includes customization and explosive bolts that allow the pilot or passenger to safely depart his vehicle with haste. Each ejection system installed

Security system I

Sonar T

Stealth config. -
Thermal imager

eo scanner

CONNOMNW=0N [T

can support a single individual. EM detector (PL 5): This sensor de-
tects and localizes electromagnetic

* Increase base vel icle cost by 100% 1 Increase base vehicle cast by 50%

emissions such as radar and radio. It

has no jamming capability.

Excavation gear (PL 4): The vehi-

cle is equipped with a backhoe,

grader, pieces

bulldozer blade, and similar of heavy equipment. Excava-

tions of large sections of earth and

sand are possible; exact specifica-

tions depend on the vehicle.

`Hi-power engine (PL 5): This ac-

cessory increases a vehicles cruis-

ing speed, maximum speed, and

acceleration ratings by 20%. For ex-

ample, a car with a normal cruising

speed of 100 kph has a cruising

speed of 120 kph with the hi-power

engine option.

The performance package can be

purchased any number of times,

given the limits of the vehicle's dura-

128bility. Of course, each accessory doubles the vehicle's base cost.

IR detector (PL 5): This sensor scans for unusual high-energy signatures in the infrared band, allowing the operator to detect vehicles by the heat of their exhaust, engines, or (in the case of fast vehicles) the fric-
tion of their passage through the air.
IR detectors prove most useful against vehicles that are jamming
incoming signals or aren't emitting
any radio noise. The IR detector isn't as sensitive as the thermal imager, but it has a much greater range.
Mass detector (PL 7): One of the most sophisticated sensor systems available, the mass detector can instantaneously detect any significant mass within range. A passive system, it doesn't emit detectable radiation. Typically, the mass detector is

used against airborne or spaceborne vehicles; the signatures of such vehicles are not masked by contact with the ground. An operator can attempt
to detect heavy vehicles or structures
on the surlace with +3 penalty. Medical suite (PL 5): This is a com-
prehensive emergency care unit. At PL 5 or 6, this suite consists of a first aid kit, facilities equal to @ surgical kit, a medical scanner, and all appropriate medicinal supplies. At PL7 or higher, the medical suite also includes a life support pack. Stretchers, backboards, temporary casts and splints, and other such tools are included as well. The cumulative effect of this gear provides a -2 bonus to Medical Science skill checks.
Performance package (PL 5): The

skill. A scientist investigating tasks in the specialty field gains a -2
10 bonus to skill checks while using the
D science suite.

Security system (PL 5): A security

system consists of a user-recognition
system (at PL 5, voice-activated; at

PL 6, bioelectric signature), extra-

tough doors and windows, a proximi-

ty alarm, a motion or displacement

sys sensor, and an emergency call

SIJIRIN

tem designed to notily the nearest

law-enforcement authorities when

the vehicle is stolen or broken into

by someone other than the owner. A

security system provides a +3 penal

ty to an intruder's Security-security

devices or Manipulation-lockpick skill check.

Sonar (PL 5): Sonar can be used in

active or passive mode. Active sonar

vehicle's maneuverability has been enhanced by a top-notch suspension, sensitive controls, and aerobatic control surfaces. Its drive rating improves by -1, providing a bonus to Vehicle Operation skill checks.
The performance package can be purchased up to three times. Each package increases the vehicle's cost by 50%.
Radar (PL 5): A radar system allows the operator to detect distant aircratt, spacecratt, ships on the surface of the ocean, or even vehicles moving on the ground. A skill check involving the use of radar is modi-

cation suite is a prerequisite for this accessory. A vehicle equipped with this system can be operated remotely by radio control or datalink. The console includes control connections to all major systems, so that the vehicle can be started and piloted remotely. If the vehicle has any weapons, the operator of the remote may fire these normally. Using a remote console to pilot a vehicle or use any of its systems carries a +2 penalty.
Rescue gear (PL 5): This special
equipment includes a rescue pack,
first aid kit, magnetic clamps, fire

is more likely to detect targets, providing a2 bonus to the operator's skill check. Unfortunately, using active sonar guarantees that the searching vessel is noticed by any sonar-equipped vehicle in range.
Stealth configuration (PL 6): The vehicle is fitted with radar-absorbent coating, covered intakes, and other
measures that make it difficult to de-
tect. An enemy sensor operator using radar or infrared mediums suffers a +3 penalty to any skill check to detect a stealth-equipped vehicle.
`Thermal imager (PL 5): This sensi-
tive imaging system converts in-

fied by the nature of the target; a high-flying aircraft in open space is easy to spot, but a low-flying heli

extinguisher, chain hoist, compressor, cutting torch, portable pump, several hundred meters of synthetic

copter is a different story. (See "Detection, Evasion, and Pursuit," page

rope, a toolkit, and an assortment of other useful items.

133, for information on range and de-

Salvage gear (PL 5): The vehicle is

tection modifiers.) Radar is an active equipped for heavy-duty towing, sal-

system; radar emissions can be detected by an ECM pod or EM detector.
A search (PL 5): This radar set

vage, and load and removal operations. It features a winch or powered chain hoist, cutting and welding

may be mounted on a surface vehi- gear, a compressor, pump, generator,

cle for air surveillance, or on an air- and demolitions materials appropri-

borne platform.

ate to the campaign's current

Air/Space (PL ) This is a more

Progress Level. For example, at PL 6,

powertul air search radar, used in at- salvage gear will include four or five

mosphere or in space.

applications of plasma jelly. See

Multiband (PL 7): This is an improved version of the air/space

"Prepared Explosives" in Chapter 11 of the Players Handbook.

radar, with greater frequency agility
and exceptional range. Surface search (PL §): This radar is
mounted on surlace vehicles for the

Science suite (PL 6): The science suite consists of a computer with appropriate databases or science pro-
grams, a comfortable workstation,

purpose of spotting other surface vehicles such as ships at sea. It can also be mounted on an airborne platform to search for ground targets.
Remote console (PL 6): A communi

and a general battery of instruments that provide a working set of tools for any Life Science or Physical Science skill checks. In addition, the hero may specify one particular specialty

129

e =)
p

76mm cannon 120mm cannon

100/4001500 HI (p)/6 dBW/dA+Im/dB+1m 150/500/2000 HI (pVA dBW/AB+1M/d6+3m

DEHICLES

.50 caliber mg

25mm chain gun

100/4001000 HI (VG dB+1w/2d4+2wd8m 150/6001500 HI ()6 2d4+1w3daw/dBm 1 Km/3 Km/10 km HI ()& dBs/dB+1w/d6m S001500/5000 HI (gVA dB+2w/d6+aw/dd+Bm

25mm charge gun
76mm rail cannon 120mm rail cannon Laser cannon

200/800/2000 HI (p)6 2d4+28wAdA+IW/dEIm 4 B/A
200/800/4000 HI (p)G 6+ 1IW/dB+IM/dB+a1m F 10 400/2000/5000 HI (pVA dB+Iw/dBm/dI2+2m2 F 10 250/ 502500 En (e)G d6+2w/d8+Bw/da+1m2 F 20

Arc cannon Plasma cannon
Quantum cannon

100/250/500 En (e)/6 2d8s/2dBw2dam 2 F 120/5001800 En (e)A 2dBw/2dB+2w/dB+1aI2m F 8 100/40 1500 En (e)/6 2d6W/dEM/dE+2m2 FB/A 60/20

Maser cannon

300/8003000 En (A dB:2w/da+1m/d6+2m

frared light into visible light. It is

ons use several durability points,

120mm cemnon: A typical tank gun

useful for spotting heat sources and and may be too large and too heavy of the Industrial Age, the 120mm can-

seeing through darkness or bad

for smaller vehicles.

non penetrates even the toughest of

weather, although its range is much

armors, Collateral damage equal to

shorter than that of an IR detector. A vehicular thermal imager allows the
operator lo ignore pendlties in condi-

System Descriptions

one-hal the damage rolled extends
in a 2-meter radius.

tions that would obscure normal sight, as well as detecting nonvisi-

Almost any weapon from the personal weapons list can be fitted to a ve-

PL 5: Information Age .50 caliber machine gun: The .50

ble heat emanations such as concealed or recently used vehicles.
Video scanner (PL 6): This is a special sensor that sweeps an are.

hicle. Assume that any standard ranged weapon from TasLE P3g: RANGED WEAPONS uses | point of durability, and that any heavy weapon

caliber is a heavy machine gun designed more for antivehicular than antipersonnel use. Introduced late in Progress Level 4, it remains common

searching for contrast or motion. It's
useful for spotting concealed vehicles or vehicles using a camoutlager. Skill checks made with a video scan-

2 from TagLE PA0: HEAvY WEAPONS uses points of durability. See Chapter 11: Weapons & Armor in the Player's Handbook.

ner gain a -2 bonus.

From time to time, you or your

players may become interested in a

VEHICULAR

weapon that isn't on the list. That's okay; the list in TABLE G29: VEHICULAR

WEAPONS

WEAPONS isn't intended to be comprehensive. There's no reason you can't

Heroes operating in dangerous areas may discover a need for firepower heavier than they can carry. Vehicular weaponry answers that need.
Like vehicular accessories, vehic-

allow additions to the weapons described below. If there's a weapon you think is available--or will be someday in the future--create it

ular weapons require support, brac-
ing, and mounting. To reflect the fact that some vehicles can carry larger weapons than others, each vehicle's

PL 4: Industrial Age 76mm cannon: This is the heaviest
gun that can be mounted on light tanks and vehicles that aren't really

durability rating limits the number
of accessories and weapons that can be installed. Most vehicular weap-

tanks. Collateral damage equal to one-halt the damage rolled (round down) extends in a 2-meter radius.

Weapon:
Acc:
Range:
Type:

tank missile is a wire-guided or

D laser-designated rocket with a back-
up target-imaging system. Upon im-

--[_l --

pact, it inflicts one-half the damage

rolled in a 10-meter radius. Six mis-

siles are carried in the launcher, and

additional ammunition may be car-

ried in a locker as per the AA mis-

sile, above.

PL 6: Fusion Age

SIDIKAN

25mm charge gun: The light-vehi-

cle weapon of choice at Progress

Level 6, the 25mm charge gun resem-

bles the chain gun in most respects, but uses the electrochemical firing

action of a charge gun. 76mm rail cannon: This weapon

uses a magnetic driver to launch a

scramjet shell, which ignites after

leaving the barrel and accelerates to hypersonic speeds. The blast causes

collateral damage similar to the

76mm cannon

120mm rail cannon: A fearsome

skytank weapon, the 120mm rail gun launches heavy rounds to hyperson

ic speeds. The burst radius is similar

to the 120mm cannon, above

Laser cannon: The laser cannon uses a special fluorescing plasma

mixture to generate intense bursts of light focused through an optical tar-

geting system.

throughout PL 5 as well. Unlike other vehicular weapons, the .50 caliber can also be fired using the Heavy Weapons-direct fire skill
25mm chain gun: This light, rapidfire cannon is designed to knock out any armored vehicle short of a tank Its explosive shells endanger anyone unforturiate enough to be in the area; collateral damage equal to one-hali the damage rolled extends in a 2-meter radius.
Antiaircraft (AB) missile: This sys

tem includes ad- air/space radar, in dition to fire control systems and a
backup heat-seeking mode. Six AA
missiles are carried in the launcher, and each additional durability point used for ammunition represents a locker or storage compartment for four additional missiles. Upon impact, a missile inflicts one-half the damage rolled within 10 meters.
Antitank (AT) missile: Designed to pierce the heaviest armor with a shaped-charge warhead, the anti-

PL 7: Gravity Age
Arc cannon: A heavy, vehicular version of the hand-held arc gun developed at this Progress Level, it uses a laser to ionize a path through the air, and then delivers a massive electrical charge a split-second later.
Plasma cannon: One of the most spectacular weapons available, the plasma cannon creates a white-hot blast of superheated gas and uses a
magnetic accelerator to hurl energy at the target.
Quantum cannon: Subatomic particles travel from this cannon at relativistic speeds, imparting high energy and kinetic damage to the target. The secondary cinematic effects of the restricted quantum cannon are brilliant

PL 8: Energy Age

Maser cannon: The maser cannon

uses a powerful matter reactor and @

linear multiband antenna array to

create devastating beams of electro-

magnetic energy. It combines the

cutting power of a laser with intense

radiant heat.

131

10VEHICULAR
4 ARMOR

Armor allows a vehicle to absorb damage when it is struck, much like a character rolls for armor after suffering damage. The cost of the armor
DEHICLES depends on three factors: the size of the vehicle (reflected in its durability rating), the amount of armor, and the type of armor. Alloy armor (first seen at PL4) is

made of large quantities of super-
tough metal alloys such as vanadi um steel. Polymeric armor (PL 6} is

composed of micro-engineered plas-
tics. Cerametal (PL7) is made from laminated ceramics and lightweight metals. Neutronite (PL7) is an alloy composed of compressed tungsten and disassociated neutrons. Nanofluidic armor (PL 8) is a system of smart liquid metals with extraor-

The effect of armor is given on the left side of Table G30. The monetary cost of the armor, based on the durability of the vehicle, is given on the right side of the table. A dash indicates that the amount of armor isn't available for a vehicle of that dura
bility rating; smaller vehicles can't

dinary conductivity and memory characteristics.

be heavily reinforced.

Armor may have a durability cost,
VEHICLE determined by the amount of armor ComBAT selected. Light armor, regardless of
the type, has no durability cost. Mod-

erate armor costs | durability point
for vehicles whose total durability is between 3 and 6 points. For vehicles
of larger size, moderate armor costs 2
durability points. Heavy armor costs 4 durability points.

Your first decision as the Gamemaster of a world with vehicles and vehicle combat is simple but important. Do you want to narrate the scene, or do you want to visually
present it?

TaBLE G30: VEHICULAR ARMOR

Armor Tupe Polymeric Alloy Cerametal Neutronite Nanofluidic
Polymeric
Alloy Cerametal Neutronite
132Nanofluidic

Dur vs. Cost

HI [

-2 36 7+

Light Armor-

da-1 da-1 da-2 BK 3K 5K

d6-1 d6-1 d4a-1 5K 10K 20K

d6-1 d6- d6-1 10K 20K SO0K

d6 dB d6-1 25K S0K 100K

dB-1 as8-1 d8 SO0K 100K 200K

Moderate Armaor-

da d4a a4

-- 10K 20K

da+1 da+1 a4 - 20K 50K

d4a+1 da+1 da+1

--_-- 40K 8OK

d6+1 d6+1 a6

- 100K 200K

244 2da 2d4

--_ 3I00K 600K

Heavy Armor-

da+1 da+1 d6-1 -

50K

d6+1 d6+1 a6

-

BOK

a8 a8 a8

--

200K

d8+1 dB+1 dB+1 --

400K

2d4+1 2d4+2 2da+1 --

TM

In the narrative style, you won't concern yourself with the exact maneuvers or position of the vehicles involved. Simply keep track of how far they are from each other, and whether they're closing, opening, holding, or attempting to break off Maybe the jet fighter has to loop, bank, or dive to get at the other guy--the important thing is that the enemy's 5 kilometers away, and that the jet fighter is attempting to close the distance 1o get into cannon range. The basics of the narrative style are described in Chapter 12: Vehicles in the Player's Handbook.
When you lay out a visual representation of the vehicle batle on a map or diagram, loose intentions (close, open, etc.) no longer matter. If a hero wants to close the distance, he'll choose maneuvers that move his vehicle closer to the other one on the map. The range between vehicles can be determined by the map,
The advantage of the narrative style is that it runs faster. Its good when you don't want to break the flow of a roleplaying session by suddenly transforming the game into a miniatures battle. On the other hand, using the visual style is perfect for players who like detail in their com-
bat scenes and enjoy the opportunity
to show off their tactical cunning.
tShetetingFighUt p
Regardless which method you choose, you have the same basic requirements for presenting the scene. You have to choose an opening. range, beginning speed, and intention for each vehicle. You may also need to decide if either vehicle is likely to be surprised, just as in per-
sonal combat. Finally, if you intend

1o use a square grid or a hex map to mark vehicle positions, you need to pick a scale.

--[--]

Opening Range
The opening range of a vehicle fight depends on the prevailing condi-

Condition

Surface

Hazardous 2d6 20 m

Crowded 4d6 X 20 m

Air

3d6

100 m

6d6 100 m

tions and the type of vehicles involved. Jet fighters routinely sight
each other at a range of 30 kilome-
ters. High-altitude planes can use

Normal Clear

3d8 100 m 6dB 100 m

2d4

5 km

3d4a 10 km

ST

1adar to detect airborne targets hundreds of kilometers away. But a pair of automobiles playing tag in busy city streets might not see each other

TasLe G32: VenicLe DeTecTion RANGE

until they're within 50 meters. You can decide the opening range
by considering the circumstances that led to the vehicle combat, or by tolling on Table G31.
Clear conditions include bright,

System
EV detector
IR detector* Mass detector Rada,

Use Skill Check (0/G/A)
s,a 50 km/100 km/150 km
a 20 kn/40 km/60 km s,a 10k knmV/SO0k km/100k km

sunny day; a straight, well-paved, empty road. Highways and open, high-altitude skies are examples of clear conditions.
Normal conditions include normal

Air search Air/Space
Multiband Surface search*

100 km/200 km/400 km
200 km/400 km/600 km 300 km/600 km/900 km 20 km/40 km/60 km

driving and piloting conditions. An uncrowded, winding road, light seas,

10 km/20 km/30 km

and moderate-altitude skies fall into this category.
Crowded conditions occur in
heavy traffic, poor visibility, and bad weather. Low-altitude skies, high seas, and congested traffic are examples of crowded conditions.

Video scanner*

20 km/40 km/60 km 2 km/4 km/6 km
1 km/2 kmv/3 km

s: surface use

erial use

* Range is 10 times greater from an airborne platform

Hazardous conditions are the

worst possible conditions. Inner city streets at rush hour, perilous off-road driving, total darkness, and extremely low altitudes--particularly near obstacles such as cliffs or buildings--are included in this category.
Actual detection ranges might be far greater than this under ideal conditions. See "Detection, Evasion, and
Pursuit." Since most vehicular
weapon ranges don't exceed the maximum possible opening range in clear conditions, there's no reason to keep track of combat scenes until vehicles approach weapons range.

Detection may be modified by ob-

i a vehicle operator spots an op-

scurity--sonar is confused by turbu- ponent before it gets within combat

lent waters, radar by ground clutter range, the operator may choose to and poor atmospherics, visual scans flee and avoid combat altogether.

by darkness or fog, and so on. At

Compare the maximum speeds of

your discretion, apply modifiers from the vehicles. i the fleeing vehicle is

Mobi- TasLE G33: VemcLe DETECTION FIERS 1o the operator's skill check.
AFailure result indicates that the
sensor operator does not detect the

faster, it gets away. If the pursuing vehicle is faster, it eventually catchs up and forces combat. You may allow special tactics or conditions to

approaching threat until the enemy automatically evade the attack.
is actually in combat range; see TABLEMaybe the skytank can round a cliff

G31: OpenInG RANGE. On a Critical

and fly into a hangar, for example.

Failure, the operator does not detect

the enemy at all, and the enemy may

Detection, Evasion, and Purs:
When vehicles are involved, long-
range modern sensors such as radar,
sonar, or computer-enhanced visual
scans may come into play. These de-
vices allow the operator to make a System Operation-sensors skill check in place of an Awareness check to see how far away the potential target can be detected. See TAbLE RANGE. G32: VERICLE DETECTION

be able to achieve surprise. # Example: Science Officer
McHiggens is using a bomber's air search radar to keep an eye out for danger. On an Ordinary result, the hero spots the enemy at a range of 100 km; on a Good result the hero spots the enemy at 200 km; and on an Amazing result, the hero spots the enemy at 400 km. 1f McHiggens fails her System Operation-sensors check, the enemy aircraft closes to combat range undetected.

TasLE G332 VEHicLE DETECTION
MODIFIERS

Obscurity Madi +3
none

Good

-2

Amazing -3

13

--(==}
p»
UERICLES

phase of the action round. Make sure your scale is set large enough.
Unless you have a very large hex sheet or playing ared, you won't want vehicles to travel more than three or four hexes each phase. Otherwise, you'll be forced to shift your map constantly.
» Surface vehicles travel between 20 and 200 kph under normal circumstances: a scale of 20 or 40 meters per hex is appropriate.
P Aircrat travel between 100 and 3,000 kph; a scale of at least 200 me-
ters per hex or square is appropriate.
Long-range missile attacks of 30 or 40 kilometers may give you trouble,
s0 you could use a scale of | kilome-
ter per hex if necessary.

The Action
Round

In vehicle combat, the action round

proceeds exactly like the action

round in personal combat, with two

key exceptions. First, a vehicle

moves in each phase of the round at

its current speed. A car racing along

a1 200 kilometers per hour covers 200

Skycar engineers install a charge gun

meters per phase, every phase. Changing this speed requires a de-

Beginning Intentions
Opening speed is easy: How fast was each vehicle going before the encounter occurred? In normal or clear conditions, assume that each vehicle was moving at its listed cruising speed.
Examine the situation that led to
the scene and decide what direction
each vehicle is heading. If one vehi cle pursued the other, then the flee-
ing vehicle begins with an intent to
open, while the pursuer begins with an intent to close. If the vehicles were paralleling each other, both might begin with an intent to hold.
In the narrative style, an intent to close means that the vehicle is head-
ing toward the other, an intent to
open or break means that it's head: ing away from the other, and an in tent to hold means that it's heading off to one side, or matching speeds

Tactics-vehicle tactics is the appropriate skill for sefting up a vehi. cle ambush. The degree of success of the ambush leader's Tactics check
inflicts a +1, +2, or +3 penalty to the
victim's Awareness or System Opera-
tion-sensors skill check to avoid sur-
prise

liberate maneuver on the part of the driver.
The second key feature of the action round in vehicle combat ties into
vehicle maneuvers. Any character at
the controls of a vehicle is allowed to make a Routine maneuver in each phase of the action round to keep his

In addition, the conditions may provide a modifier. Hazardous condi
tions provide a +2 penalty to the victim's surprise check. Crowded
conditions add a +1 penalty. Normal conditions apply no modifier, and clear conditions provide a -2 bonus.
# Example: A skytank commander attempting an ambush rolls an Amazing result on his Tactics-vehicle tactics check (+3). The conditions are crowded (+1). The opposing vehicle operator must make a successful
check with a +4 penalty (1+3=4) to
avoid surprise.

vehicle under control and make it go where he wants. This means that the driver or pilot gets "free" actions to maneuver the vehicle even during the phases where his own action
check didn't allow him to act.
# Example: Captain lannotti gets an Ordinary result on her action check. During the Amazing and Good phases of the round, she can make a Routine maneuver with her fighter jet even though it's not her
phase to act yet. In order for a pilot to perform more
than a Routine maneuver, a hero must wait for the phase determined

Surprise
The same rules for surprise in personal combat apply to vehicle combat, with one exception--in the surprise phase, the surprised vehicle doesn't stand still; it moves straight
134forward at its current speed without maneuvering.

Scale Setting a scale for the battle is nec essary if you're using a grid or a dia gram to represent the combat
visually. Vehicles move a number of meters each phase equal to their speed in kph. So, a car traveling at 80 kph covers 80 meters in each

by her action check. Attempting
more complicated maneuvers--mod-
erate or extreme stunts--requires the hero to wait until she has an action available. If the hero wants to shoot a weapon or operate a system in the vehicle, this also requires an action.

Visual Combat

It you represent the vehicles involved in combat on some kind of hex map or grid, everything works just like it does when you use the narrative technique to run the scene--with two key differences. First, the need for range intentions disappears. With a hex map or grid,
it's easy to see who's heading where
and what the range is. `The second difference between
narrative and visual combat lies in how maneuvers work. Each grade of maneuver (Routine, Moderate, or Extreme) allows a specific range of

u----
SIIKIN

possible adjustments or turns for a

vehicle moving on the hex field. The

pilot can choose to make a maneuver

at any point during his vehicle's maneuver that phase. For example, a

vehicle moving six hexes could com-

plete a turn beginning in the first

Narrative Combat

hex or any hex up until the last. `The complexity of the maneuver
attempted governs the type of check

The narrative combat system is described in the Player's Handboot. Here, you must balance roleplaying fun with elements of realism. The rules in the Player's Handbook offer guidelines, but much of the time it will be up to you to determine how tough @ maneuver is, what modifiers to apply, and the specifics of how situation resolves. Be sure to apply the modifiers from the "Vehicle Operation Modifiers" list on this page.
There are a few critical things to remember. A pilot or driver can't change his range infention without succeeding at @ Moderate maneuver Basically, a Moderate maneuver allows the pilot to alter his intention by one category--from close to hold, from hold to either open or close, from open to hold or break, or from break to open. If he succeeds at an Extreme maneuver, he can change his range intention by up to two categories.
As part of any vehicle maneuver, a hero may accelerate or decelerate. TABLE P42: VEHICLES in the Player's Handbook lists the acceleration (in kph and meters per phase) of each vehicle. Usually, vehicles decelerate at the same rate. A land vehicle can decelerate at twice its acceleration if the operator succeeds on a Moderate maneuver

1o be made--if the hotshot pilot decides to try a hal-loop, it's a Moderate maneuver.
To determine who moves when in each phase, you'll need to determine who has the advantage. Each round. the pilot with the best action check result has the advantage. In the event of a tie, the pilot with the supeior action check score wins.
In each phase, the pilot with the advantage can choose to maneuver his vehicle first or to allow his opponent to move first instead. Moving first might allow a vehicle to get into agood position to shoot before the enemy responds, or to get out of the enemy's sights before the enemy fires a weapon. Moving second offers the hero a chance to see where the
enemy is going before committing to any movement.
Apilot keeps the advantage until he fails a maneuver check. When this happens, the advantage automatically shifts. The advantage might shift back and forth several times in the course of a single round.
Failing a Vehicle Operation Check A pilot who fails a Vehicle Operation check may or may not complete his maneuver as intended. Just as in the narrative system, the pilot must immediately make a second Vehicle Operation check. The result of the check determines the outcome, as

described on TanLE P44: LosiNG Conthe TROL OF A VEHICLE on page 201 in Player's Handbook.

Vehicle Scales

When vehicles moving on different

scales meet in batile--say, a jet

fighter strafing a car--assume that

the faster-moving vehicle appears on

the map at the extreme limit of its

weapon range or the target's weapon

range, whichever is greater, and ad-

just the faster vehicle's scale to the

slower vehicle. For example, a car

driving at 160 kph might cover four

40-meter hexes in each move, but a

jet flying at 640 kph actually zooms

16 hexes per phase in the car's frame

of reference. You'd normally use a

much more compressed scale for the

jet's movement, but since you have to

compare it to a car, you have to use

the lowest common denominator.

15

Byf=--=}
p
DEHICLES

Vehicle Maneuvers Visualized

Routine Maneuvers Moderate Maneuvers Extreme Maneuvers

(no maodifier]

[+1 penalty)

(+3 penalty)

When the fast-moving vehicle flies off the end of the map, use the return times suggested in TABLE P45: page VERICLE SCALE RETURN TIME on 204 in the Player's Handbook. When it retums, it shows up on the same side of the map it left from. If @ pilot wants to loop back to another side of
the map, it takes twice as long as
listed on Table P46.
Attack and
Defense
Using a vehicle system to attack or to defend against an attack requires an
action on the part of a character in
the vehicle. A gunner or passenger can operate a weapon any time he can perform an action. The pilot or
driver can do so too, but operating a
`weapon system and performing a maneuver in the same phase adds difficulty to the maneuver check.
One useful tactic in vehicle combat is holding an action. If the gun-
ner doesn't have a good shot in the
Amazing phase, he can always wait until the Good, Ordinary, or Marginal phase to see if a better shot develops. Sometimes, a vehicle might be in a great position early in the round--but if no one on board has an action available, no shot takes place. Such is the stress and uncertainty of combat. Maybe the gunner's trying to lock in the target, arm the weapon, or program the search pattern. Maybe the pilot is a little disoriented from the last high-g maneuver.
The attacker applies any modi fiers from the "Vehicle Attack Modifiers" sidebar to his skill check that
are appropriate to the situation.
Attack and Defense Skills
The mechanics for attacking with a vehicular weapon system are just like attacking with a personal weapon. The target may have a resistance modifier, reflecting how hard itis to hit; it may be at short, medium, or long range; it may have some kind of cover. The skill used by the attacking character depends on the weapon fired.
» Personal Weapon: A hero can lean out the window and fire a gun at the bad guys. This is a normal attack using the hero's Modern Ranged Weapons skill. This is not possible for aircraft at high altitudes or high speeds (400 kph o faster).

»> Heavy Weapon: A hero could lean out the window and fire a heavy weapon, or a heavy weapon might be attached to the vehicle in a unpowered mount--a .50 caliber machine gun in the back of a jeep, for instance. Use the appropriate Heavy Weapons specialty skill.
» Weapon and Defense Stations: Many vehicles include powered
weapons systems integral to the ve-
hicle. This includes all vehicle weapons listed in TABLE G29: VErCULAR WEAPONS, except for the .50 caliber machine gun. These onboard
weapons rely on the System Opera-
tion-weapons skill.
Vehicle Damage
Vehicles sustain damage much like living characters do. They have stun, wound, and mortal ratings; wound or mortal damage inflicted by enemy weapons causes secondary damage;
and the vehicle's armor may stop some or all of the primary damage of ahit. There are two key differences to be aware of, though.
Many vehicles, unlike most personal targets, have Good toughness.
`This means that the damage from
weapons of Ordinary firepower--including most personal weapons-- automatically degrades. Mortal damage becomes wound damage, wound damage becomes stun dam-
age, and stun damage is ignored.
For example, a hero who fires o 9mm pistol at the enemy's vehicle may roll for damage and appear to inflict 6 wounds. He inflicts only 6 stuns. Any armor the car has may further reduce or entirely negate that damage.
Heavy weapons are more useful against vehicles, since many of these have a firepower of at least Good. Their damage doesn't degrade against tough targets. Most vehicular weapons are also rated for at least Good firepower, and chew up tough vehicles just as badly as they do unarmored characters.
Excessive stun or wound damage impairs a vehicle's performance, The pilot of a vehicle that has lost more than half of its stun or wound points
must make an immediate skill check
to see if he loses control. In addition,
any skill attempted using the vehicle o its systems--Vehicle Operation or System Operation--suffers a +1 pendlty until the damage is repaired. Its harder to pilot or shoot
from a damaged car or plane.

2--_[----4
N]LEIN S

When a vehicle loses all of its

stun or wound points, a durability
check must be made for the vehicle. A vehicle's skill check for this score is equal to its stun point total. If the vehicle passes its durability check, nothing happens. If the vehicle fails,

it stalls and can't be started again
until it's repaired or juryrigged. Thereatter, as with characters, excess stun damage becomes wound damage (at the rate of 2 stuns equal 1 wound), and excess wound damage becomes mortal damage (at the rate of 2 wounds equal 1 mortal).
Mortal damage has the chance to disable a vehicle with a single roll. Every time a vehicle sustains mortal damage, it must make a durability check. The vehicle's skill score for

this check equals its stun rating, but
don't forget to include a +1 penalty for each mortal box and any other penalties accrued for stuns or wounds. If the vehicle fails to pass its durability check, it ceases to func-
tion until repairs are made. On «

Critical Failure, a vital system

breaks down and the vehicle ex-

plodes. Passengers suffer d8+1 mor-

tal points of energy (En) damage;

characters within 6 meters suffer

2d6+1w, and characters within 12

meters suffer d8-lw.

137

Every starfaring hero dreams about sailing through the galaxy in his
own starship. A hero with a ship no longer has to rely on commercial
schedules, the vagaries of working for passage on tramp freighters, or the command structure of military
transport. & ship captain is the
master of his destiny, able to come and go as he pleases. Of course,
the ship itself can become a crucial member of a hero party, especially
once it's been modified and
equipped with the finest systems
that money can buy.

=
>

SAIESINGS

TABLE G34: SHip HuLLs

------------------Civilian

Hull

Comp

Launch

2

Courier

a

Trader

6

Lt freighter B

Transport 10

Med freighter 12

Hull§--M8MMMMMMM--

Durability

Cost

8

50 K

16

100 K

24

200 K

EC]

300 K

ao0

500 K

a8

TM

--
Hull
Fighter
Cutter
Scout
Attack
Escart
Corvette

Military Hul§--MMMMMMM

Comp Durability

Cost

10

100 K

20

250 K

LE

40

50

60

-omes wound damage, wound ige becomes stun damage, and
stun damage is ignored. I a weapon of Ordinary firepower is used, mortal
damage becomes stun damage, and
d and stun damage is ignored.
Hull describes a particular class
of spacecraft, from small launch-
hter-class ships to moderate-
edium freighters and
e-class vessels.
1ip indicates the maximum of separate compartments
a ship's systems may be divided
ong. A ship may have fewer com-
partments than this number. but not

Durability is the total durabili or mortal rating, of the ship. The durability value listed here is divided among the compartments o form their individual durability ratin Military hulls can carry more sys tems because of their sturdier con-
struction and spartan arrangement.
(For example, the designer of fighter with a total durability of 10 may divide its points evenly, forming two
compartments of § durability each.)
t can contain more points, unless the
Gamemaster is designing an extraordinary alien vessel.
Cost is the cost of the empty hull,
without any compartments or
systems.

p----
SPACESHIPS

System Types Allowed

Command Communication, computer, crew,

defense, sensor, weapon

Engineering Cargo, drl /e, engine, power, support
Weapons Defense, weapon

Auxiliary Pawer, suppart

Electronics Communication, computer,

defense, sensor

Cargo

cargo

Crew

Crew

Compartments

Command

ddcw(oHcTttahghpceAtbhhoauuhrorotoynaohuieenehmorrrimwsATlrtuernaaeddeughphsLspnhsglbbgnprspholieoitysadeootiipseaogiechll,sosprchomriiedhoetsutrtttdmarTodamexyyhmesmasyraissmlipriietvapmudeonpei-pooymTinnoflvnpssnnt'dfoaaAaiss--,ogtfauprtnoreneBcidseslstimongLwd1dred,uecmlsetErclseotehbe0uteaemleawesssmnuGleeaqlsirrin.teiltsathrpgosmdekusScptreyutoyaonesseaa0toapmdipcrytinelltn:shtrosuoyedsrastoi,aCttmnsshtmtnl,toocerevotysageozcnpmpdOee,omasvaeao(tanoutnbwerpennsmengttwdmwrMedsammssaxivsesacg.ie.bpihtehsopafeeterunrPinigoaffaltSnxeeotl)ieleptesd1Atoerhrl;iyoslrtrstani6meacchaeemRefm.nnat1hoflidaFntuldTrre)iesenfytogtm.,rnM-rotsE, NncchmtspotefwcAtCftoimnehhhoooaeohorflsomuerrreigaeemTslsriaaaCsrdamptdnarhnctyntscccimphr'odecridsnaypoooyspeotesmocguahpwmmmangccvamlnsremmvtaoo,lstanetpmpohihpm,rmemmrcaaaactciutiesaarbhparnreraoodesasupprntteet,tcdtnnmncetemminaalydimoohltftorhctrr.rmceheemnttioacteococmmnrnnnfehsTovnnaelfoimkes.ttesgeentemwhtb.mesr,r,ehnnadyesaysoSptnrptttIaah,sslhaai.nma.cdliatnditninecerpceonsaregdatlTsddtyme.mlcdmecmmlsannhlraedkoocAsepneaaeesisaeci.,asrmrtaonlstlnklcpvlTielrprttiianeotosasestsmshlnnwmrhhsn,abnhesmtgcctyietiietieaochpaltavpacsleinilhaaeisdtuecntlneonyntniyesonoadnshedssodmtynesaitsgmeeieefnsiiuntealrr-tcianoih-ps-ie---lgtn-rnno-ssent,,s.

dlwmcpliioaussiarstttrnsethtamdybiotnihfedlineieesuttaayftrccyoa.ihhrbptTsieiAleccsniBlootsfLymm,otEafrpplepGslaagaoy3rrtais5ttinrmmto:detnsmCeelennassOttosr.feaMatThlaonhlefdseoPhscwtAcioohgoweRmensdTet-dMEpECAncgNaieonnssoerTgheetrmsisiianSpnsgaipemtrwseaecureporisllnotmotlm.wgcphIaefaaetrretvnthdmepetlehaasntnehtrtl.ieepa,aTnsaitdhsnedeolqinsifhenueipi-mep'ssnpuageepnnid-y--

toit.

with a stardrive or other FTL drive

system, the engineering space must

contain this machinery.

Auxiliary Compartment These compartments contain nonvital engineering equipment, such as secondany life support and power systems. Main power systems may be located in quxiliary spaces to lessen the importance of any single compartment.
Electranics Compartment
Electronics spaces are reserved for fragile, high-value systems such as computers and sensors systems. Defensive systems of all kinds can also be installed within electronics compartments
Cargo Compartment
These compartments are designed for carrying cargo or fuel tanks. (Progress Level 6 ships require substantial reserves of hydrogen fuel for their engines.) Hangar bays, docking modules, and other such facilities can be put in cargo compartments.
Crew Compartment
These spaces primarily serve as living space for passengers or crew. Other uses include labs, sick bays, workshops, lounges, entertainment facilities, and so on.

Weapons
Compartment
Weapons compartments are used for mounting weapon and defensive systems. Some weapons may be mounted in turrets, but the machinery, weapon controls, and magazines are internal structures that take up space in the hull

o this point, the ship is an empty shell. The systems in each compartment will provide it with power, life
support, engines, sensors, weapons,
defenses, and all the other components necessary to make it a servic able spacecraft
Each system uses a certain number of a compartment's durability points, depending on the system's size and bulkiness. Once a compartment's durability points have been filled, it can't hold any more systems.
Systems fall into one of 11 general
categories: cargo, communications,
computer, crew, defenses, drive, engineering, power, sensors, support, and weapons. System cost, availability, progress level, durability, and power requirements are listed and on TABLE G36: SPACESHIP SYSTEMS WEAPONS. TABLE G44: SPACESHIP
In some instances, a ship designer may purchase more than one of the
same system. Sometimes, this is
done to include two mass cannons instead of one; in other cases, multiple power plants may be required to power all of a ship's systems.
Three systems that can be included in any compartments are airlock: escape pods, and reentry capsules See the sidebars on "Airlocks" and "Reentry Capsules, Escape Pods, & Boarding Pods" in this chapter.
A ship must contain life support, a
power plant, engines, and sensors. Ships of Progress Level 6 must also include fuel tanks for their fusion power plants and engines.
ower System
The most important system of a starship is its power plant. Firing weapons, maneuvering, or raisi defensive screens or shields takes energy. If a ship's power plant is knocked out, it can't maneuver, fire
weapons, or use most of its defenses.
A ship's power plant provides power factors to all onboard systems. 1t a ship doesn't generate enough power to use all of its systems at one time, the engineer must choose which systems are powered and which are unpowered. Changing the
power configuration--depowering
systemis and powering up new
ones--requires an action on the part
of the ship's engineer. Power plants can be installed in auxiliary or engi neering compartments.

Engineers tend to the heart of the ship

----_
b
SPACESHIPS

BLE G36: SPACESHIP SYSTEMS

System Airlock Reentry capsule Boarding pod Escape pod
Fusion generator Grav-fusion cell Solar cell Mass reactor Matter converter Fusion torch Ion engine Phaton sail Planetary thruster Induction engine Stabilizer Inertial flux engine
Stardrive Drivewave
Life suppart unit Recycler unit Workshop Accumulator Autosupport unit Air/Space radar EM detector IR detectar Mass detector Multiband radar Remote network CSEpepcatrsosaivnealyazrerray Multiphase radar
Armor Chafr Damage control Jammer Point-defense gun Deflection inducer Ablative shield Displacer
Laser transceiver Radio transceiver Mass transceiver
Computer core Battle Communications Defense Engineering Navigation Science Sensars
Crew quarters Lab section Passenger suite Sick bay
Cargo space Fuel tank Hangar Autacargo

PL Avail Com [ TMil
NNACOoQm

Con

[

[

Con

DNOAD

il

[

Con

[

[

Con

il

INNOANOD

Mil

Con

ON

[

Com Com Com [ Com NNOOD

Com il Con Con Com il Con il

DRNNNNOQD
+

FANANND NAO

NOANANND ONOD NOOO

Cost Dur Pow Notes

10K

1 unit built into hull

5K

1 unit built into hull

100K

50K UN==oooe

100K

200K

100K

200K

500K

AUNWIRN

Per 3 power factors generated Per 10 power factors generated See system description Per 5 power factors generated Per 7 power factors generated

S0K 100K 100K 100K 200K 250K 250K

==
*

==U=UNW

--"ON=

Per movement point generated Per movement point generated See system description Per 20 durability of ship Per movement point generated Per 20 durability of ship Per movement point generated

M

am

=W

See system description See system description

Per 20 durability supported

See system description

O=N==

Per 20 durability supparted

~U=NO=000
s

See armor description

Per 20 durability protected

Per 20 durability of ship Per 20 durability of ship
NU==O==

~0O

-

See camputer description

See computer description

See computer description

See computer description

See computer description

See computer description

See computer description

0000OOD

See computer description

Per 6 crew members

Per 2 passengers

Per 24 cubic meters of storage

Per power plant/engine fueled

Per 1 durability pt. of vehicle

"umsU=nU=-

Per 24 cubic meters of storage

Type:
System:
PL:
Dur: Pow: Avail:

Reentry Capsules, ' Escape Pods,
& Boarding Pods

Fu

n Generator

(PL 6)
The principal power source of the

Fusion Age, the fusion generator

converts atomic energy into electri-

cal power for use throughout the

ship. Most are designed with {ai

safe systems to shut down in the

event of damage. Fusion generators

require large amounts of hydrogen fuel.

Grav-Fusion Cell (PL 6) `This power system uses the existing gravitational fields of large masses to compress and enhance the reaction of a fusion generator. It's quite bulky, but somewhat more powerful than a fusion generator of similar ca`pability. Like a fusion generator, each grav-fusion cell requires a fuel
tank.

Solar Cell (PL 6) A solar cell relies on power from a nearby star. The number of power factors each solar cell generates is determined by the distance from the nearest star. Refer to TasLE G37: SoLaR CeLts.
You may adjust the ranges on Table G37 if a ship is near an especially large, powerful star that would shed more energy or a small, weak star that would shed less. Well-developed and colonized star systems may power solar cells along star lanes within a system. By projecting laser beam over the course of @ star lane, ships using solar cells can draw power at greater ranges, even beyond 50 AU from the typical stax. This artificial power method provides Amazing conditions, as noted on Table G37.

0.5 AU 0.5-5 AU 5-50 AU
50 AU

Amazing
[ Ordinary Marginal

6/cell
4/cell 2/cell
o+

* Cells may be powered artificially by las:

Mass Reactor (PL 7]

A powerful source of energy har-

b nessed by humanity to begin the Gravity Age, the mass reaclor uses a form of exotic, nonbaryonic dark matter particles and harnesses the

Movement Points Generated 12

dark matter decay reaction, releas-

2-3 45

ing vast amounts of energy. Mass re-

3-4 5-6

actors are the power source of choice in Progress Level 7; they're much more efficient than older power sources, and they can also provide

5-6 7-8 6-7 8. 6-8

star- SPACESHIPS
suificient energy to operate a

drive.

Maneuver Rating

-1

Mass reactors only require refuel-

ing of their integrated dark matter

chambers once every few months. This can be accomplished at any shipyard or specialized facility.

to provide extra maneuverability Compare the type of engine used

during combat

with its maneuver rating to deter-

A ship's engines harness the ener- mine the ship's acceleration in

Matter Converter gy output of its power plant and con- megameters (Mm) per phase per

(PL 8) This advanced power plant creates. energy through the total conversion of mass to energy. Literally anything can be used as fuel; even hydrogen, the lightest element, provides a vast amount of power for the conversion
of a@ minuscule amount of mass. In Energy Age campaigns, matter con-
verters are more powerful than mass reactors, but remain more expensive.

vert it to maneuvering capability, phase and cruising speed in AU per

represented by movement points.

hour. Because of their relatively low

Larger and more advanced engines acceleration, the cruising speed of

produce more movement points; they PL 6 ships is much slower than that

also require more power. The dura- of PL7 vessels.

bility cost and power consumption of

˘ Example: Captain Cade's scout

each engine is listed on TasLE G36

has 30 durability points. He outfits it

an SPACESHIP SYSTEMS. For example,

with an 8 durability induction en-

induction engine converts 2 power gine, which turns 8 power factors

factors into 1 movement point.

into 4 movement points. Reading

Refer to TABLE G38: SHIP MANEUVEfrRom- the "21-30" durability row

apiLiTY. Compare the ship's durability across to the "3-4" column and then

Engine Systems

with the number of movement points down, Cade's player sees that his en-

its engines generate. The result at

gine is powerful enough to provide

Aiter the power plant, the engine is the second most important system of astarship. Depending on the size and power of the engine and the amount of energy provided by the power plant, a ship may move like @ streaking greyhound or a plodding ox. Ships designed for combat or other maneuver-intensive purposes olten carry several engines in order

the bottom of the table is the space- ~1 bonus to the ship's maneuverabili-

ship's maneuver rating.
`The maneuver rating listed is the bonus or penalty the spaceship ap-

ty. Next, he refers to Table G39, which tells him that his induction engine with a -1 rating accelerates

plies to its pilot or helmsman's Vehi- at3Mm each phase and has a cruis-

cle Operation-space vehicle skill

ing speed of 2 AU per hour. Of

checks.

course, the ship designer still has to

The maneuver rating also helps to include a power plant that produces

determine a ship's acceleration and enough energy to run this engine.

cruising speed. Refer to TasLE G

SPEED. SHip ACCELERATION & CRUISING

TABLE G39: SHIP ACCELERATION & CRUISING SPEED

Maneuver Rating +3 2
+1 o 1
-2 ]

Photon Acc Cruise .001 .05 003 1
.005 .15 o1 2 .02
.03 .05

ton Acc Cruise .0os K11
o .02 .02 .5 .03 .05
1
as

Cruise .05 a
&

Induction Acc Cr se
25 3 6 1 1.5
2
3 a

Inertial Flux Acc Cruise

144

Cruise: Crui ng speed is in AU per hour.

Fusion Torch (PL 6)

This drive consists of a continuous, controlled fusion explosion. Magnetic impellers channel the dangerous

Sz==p
b

exhaust away from the ship, pro-

pelling it forward. A ship with a fu-

sion torch drive can't use its fusion

0.5 AU

engines for travel to or from plane-

0.5-5 AU

Good

tary atmosphere, and it can't use its engines to make delicate docking maneuvers, Firing its drive destroys

5-50 AU 50 AU

Ordinary Marginal

Vsal o*

anything directly beneath or within

afew kilometers of its engines. As a

SdIHS1I6dS

result, many ships equipped with fu-

sion engines include planetary

tiveness by one category (Marginal extremely short-ranged, generally

thrusters or rely on tug vessels. The to Ordinary, Ordinary to Good, etc.). affecting only the vessel it moves.

fusion torch system can't be used

For example, a photon sail powered The induction engine can be used

within a planetary atmosphere. by 2 laser cannons while operating 1o move a spacecratt within an at-

Like each fusion generator, each `more than 50 AU from a star is in

mosphere. In this case, the number

fusion torch engine requires a fuel Good conditions. A ship cannot

of AU per hour the ship moves in

tank.

power its own solar sails in this

space equates to a number of thou-

manner.

sands of kilometers per hour. Subor-

lon Engine (PL 6) More compact than the fusion torch,

Planetary Thruster

bital approaches into space can
travel faster.

the ion engine breaks down mole- (PL 6)

cules and expels the resulting ions Fusion torches and ion engines don't Stabilizer (PL 7)

with a magnetic impeller. An im-

have the precision to be used in

The stabilizer employs gravitonics in

provement over the crude strength of planet's atmosphere, and actually order to dampen the kinetic energy

the fusion torch, it is also more ex-

landing with one of them is extreme- caused by violent maneuvers. It pro-

pensive. Like each fusion generator, ly hazardous. Ships of PL § that wish vides a1 bonus to an operator's Ve-

each ion engine requires a fuel tank.

to land on planets must carry planetary thrusters, which include the

hicle Operation-space vehicle skill checks. One stabilizer unit is re-

Photon

Sail (PL 6)

Stretching out photoresponsive

ability to maneuver in atmosphere, quired per 20 points of durability of

and to leave the atmosphere for

the ship; additional stabilizers might

wings to catch solar winds much like space. Usually, this is a scramiet or be necessary, but the bonus never

galleons of old caught earthly winds, similar engine. Induction engines improves beyond 1.

a photon sail allows unpowered and inertial flux engines have no dif-

space travel using the power of a

ficulty landing a ship on a planet, Inertial Flux Engine

nearby star. The maneuverability and don't require planetary

(PL 8)

and power of this engine system is

thrusters.

Advancements in energy manipula-

determined by the number of sails employed and the distance to the

One thruster is required per 10 durability points of the ship.

tion produce the inertial flux engine, a form of propulsion that derives its

nearest star.

Thrusters provide an ability to fly in motive force from a sequence of

You may adjust the ranges on

planetary atmospheres at speeds up quantum transformation waves rip-

is TaBLE G40: PHOTON SALLS if a ship

101,000 kilometers per hour. If a

pling along a ship's hull. Through

near especially large or small stars. ship's planetary thrusters are used the conversion of subatomic proba-

Well-developed and colonized star

for its primary means of travel --typi- bilities, the waves alter the inertial

systems may power photon sails

cally out of desperation following state of the ship to suit the needs of

along specific star lanes within system. By following a laser beam

the loss of normal engines--the ac- the pilot. celeration i 0.001 Mpp and the cruis-

projected from a planet or station over the course of a star lane, ships using photon sails travel at their

ing speed is 0.01 AU per hour. Induction Engine

Drive Systems
These are devices that make a ship

best speed. This artificial method (PL 7)

capable of faster-than-light travel.

provides Amazing conditions, as

The induction engine creates an arti- Ships that don't possess these de-

noted on Table G40.

ficial slope in the labric of space,

vices--and many don't--can attempt

Individual ships may mimic this similar to that caused by the exiseffect byusing a laser cannon modi- tence of extreme masses. The ship

interstellar travel .. . but travel time
will be measured in years or dec-

fied to a nondestructive power setting to apply continuous fire upon

then behaves like any other object in ades, not days or weeks. Drive sys-

a gravity well--it falls. By varying

tems can only be mounted in

the photon sail of another ship. Each the intensity and the direction of the engineering compartments.

luser cannon must be fired at an in- artificial gravity well within the en-

A ship equipped with a drive sys-

dividual sail unit. Each laser cannon gine, the inducer can accelerate in directed at a sail upgrades its effec- any direction. Fortunately for nearby
objects, the artificial gravity well is

tem is usually referred to as a drive-
145 ship. Spaceships without drive sys-
tems are often called systemships.

--=
b

SPACESHIPS
s

10+
20-85 25-40 35-45 40-50 45-55

-
30+
a5+
50-75 55-80 60-85

s

10

15

Stardrive-equipped ships Drivewave-equipped

smhiapkse

maasktearafasltlairnfa5ll

days in 11

(11° hours). hours.

Other Drive Systems

This device requires the presence and the immense energy output of a mass reactor. It is a modification to a
`mass reactor consisting of a special
set of inversion coils and a tachyon injection system.
`The stardrive itself isn't very large, only taking up 3 durability points, but it demands a huge amount of power that must be sup plied by a mass reactor. Cross-reference the ship's total durability and its power lactors to determine the number of light-years it can traverse in a starfall of five days. See TAsLE GA1: STARFALL DISTANCES.
® Example: Jack Everstar has constructed a trader-class driveship of 24 durability points. He purchases four mass reactor units to provide 20 power factors. In a single starfall, Everstars ship can leap 5 lightyears.
The mass reactor of a driveship is usudlly a lot larger than one for a systemship. Typically, a ship powers down all other systems before using its stardrive, 50 the power requirements for sensors, weapons, defenses, and even life support can be briefly ignored during the phase in which a driveship makes starfall. Following the phase in which the
vessel enters drivespace, power can
be redistributed. Ships with the power to run their engines and weapons and make starfall at the
same time are unusual indeed.
Drivewave [PL 8) `This is an improvement of the stardrive. It relies on the same principles and requires a mass reactor, but it covers the vessel with a controlled energy field before entering drivespace. As a result, the drivewave-equipped ship completes startall in only 11 hours. Like the stardrive, it is a power hog that usually necessitates the shutdown of other systems on board. Cross-reference the ship's size in durability and its total power factors on TasL: G
STARFALL DISTANCES.

One support system that's integral toall ships (included in the hull cost) is a means for reducing the stresses of acceleration. Ships of PL 6, experiencing stresses as high as ten times the force of gravity, must rely on adaptive couches, gelatin protection, and foam suits. At PL 7 and beyond, ships rely on methods that may disregard inertia, accelerating at thousands of times the force of gravity. These vessels can also use gravitics
technology to provide a comfortable,
standard gravity environment

»
oN dIHS3I6dS

Life Support Unit
(PL B)
Alife support unit consists of systems to regulate the ship's tempera-
ture, oxygen, and pressure, and
reclamation machinery to filter and freshen air and water.
Each unit provides life support to
one or more ship compartments
whose durability totals 20 points or less.
Al spaceships must have life support provided for crewed spaces, but ashipbuilder can economize by leaving certain compartments with out life support. Compartments are either supplied with life support or
not; it's up to the ship designer to as
sign life support to individual com-
partments. Cargo and weapons
compartments can be left unprotected. Of course, if the crew ever needs to enter these areas, they must don e-suits unless the ship is docked in a hangar bay o other habitable
environment.
Recycler Unit [PL 6) Most ships rely on stored air, food, and water; over the course of @ long voyage these perishables take up a lot of space. See the description for crew and passenger quarters, below. Arecycler unit reduces the rate of a ship's stores consumption by a factor of four, thus increasing how long stores last. For example, a long range escort with a recycler unit al-
lows the crew quarters' typical
10-week stores to last 40 weeks. No benefit is gained from the use of
more than one recycler unit.
Workshop [PL 6) Amachinery room filled with heavy equipment for repair work, manufacturing, or damage control, this system counts as-a Good facility when using the Technical Science skill.

Coasting through the cosmos

Accumulator (PL 7) This device is a large "battery" that

or disabled. Compartments must be either completely supplied with life

stores power. Each accumulator

support or not at all. Autosupport

stores 10 power factors, which can be units can be used in place of the

used to run various systems if the

standard life support units.

ship's power plant is knocked out. &

normal power plant continually generates power as it is being used. The power factors of the accumulator, however, don't automatically replen ish every phase if used. For example, a ship whose engines require 2 power factors can maneuver for 5 phases on the stored power in its accumulator. Then the accumulator is empty and must be recharged by allotting power lactors to it from a

Sensor Systems
Sensors consist of sophisticated radar systems, infrared detectors, instantaneous mass detectors, and similar devices. The range of each sensor system is listed on TAsLE Gd6: page Seacestip DETECTION RANGE on 156. Typically, sensors are located in the command compartment, although they may also be placed in

standard power plant such as a fu

electronics compartments.

sion generator or mass reactor.
Autosupport Unit

Air/Space Radar (PL 6) This s the standard radar system of

7 Each autosupport system provides life support to one or more compartments whose durability totals 20

the Fusion Age, suitable for atmospheric or space operation. The system is cheap and requires no durability points to install

points or less. An integral part of

ship hull, autosupport units consume EM Detector (PL 6)

no durability, but still must be as-

This is a passive antenna array for

signed to an engineering or au:

picking up electromagnetic signals.

iary compartment, since they have a standard chance of being damaged

Tt detects radar and radio signals at

long range, and is most useful

147

against targets using sensors of their Multiband Radar

Spectroanalyzer

b--jmryown; if system,

the target is using such as air/space,

an active
multi-

band, or multiphase radar, the EM

PL 7)
This is a more

powerful

version

of

air/space radar, with greater fre-

PL 7)
This powerful analytic tool uses spectrum analysis of visible light,

receiver confers a -2 bonus to the op-
erator's System Operation-sensors

quency agility. It automatically shifts from slow, long-range scans to

measured mass signatures, radar mapping, and laser rangefinding to

check to detect the target.

rapid, short-range locks as a target find out almost everything there is to

The receiver can attempt to detect closes. nonradiating targets by scanning for
telltale drive emissions, radio chat- Remote Network

know about a planet or object. From anywhere in a solar system, a sensor operator can make a System Opera-

SPACESHIPS

ter, and other incidental signatures. `This is more difficult; using the passive system without an active target provides a +2 penalty on the System

PL 7)
A ship with a remote network carries
a number of sensor probes that can
be deployed in a constellation thou-

tion-sensors check; success provides the operator with a planets orbital characteristics, environment class, and environmental conditions

Operation-sensors checks.

sands of kilometers in diameter. This

IR Detector (PL 6)

greatly enhances the range and dis- CE Passive Array
crimination of all onboard sensors. (PL 8)

The infrared detector searches for

The net effect is a doubling of all

This system operates through com-

unusual heat signatures in the cold ranges listed on TABLE G46: SPACESHIPputer-enhanced (CE) observation of

of space. It confers a -2 bonus to the operator's skill checks to detect ships maneuvering by means of a fusion

DETECTION RANGE. `The network of probes travels par-
allel to the ship, conferring benefits

all electromagnetic energy impinging on the sensor. Visible light, electronic signals, heat, and high-

torch or an ion engine.

until the ship changes course or

band radiation emitted by the target

Mass Detectar (PL 7)

speed. The 2 durability points the

are all analyzed and compared

system occupies allow for six uses of automatically.

This sensor detects unusual or

the network. Generally, if a ship

anomalous gravitational signatures.
Its selective computerized buffers screen out all extraneous gravity ef-

changes course the remotes are lost. The remotes stay active for one day before their batteries need recharg-

Multiphase Radar
(PL 8)
The next step in the evolution of

fects trom the vicinity, zeroing in on masses that are moving or that don't

ing. Each additional durability point assigned to this system allows three

radar technology, a multiphase array consists of a simultaneous electroni-

match stored information concerning additional uses of the remote probe

the target area.

network to be stored on board: each

cally scanned radar sweep in multiple spectrums. Its built-in computer

use costs $20K.

banks compare scans across the

bandwidths.

Armar Type
Polymeric Alloy Cerametal
Neutronite
Nanofluidic
Polymeric Alloy Cerametal
Neutronite
Nanofluidic
Polymeric Alloy
Cerametal
Neutronite
14§Nanofi

HI

En

Light Armor-

da-1 da-2

d6-1 da-1

d6-1 d6-1

d6 d6-1

aNNOQ

d8-1 a8

Moderate Armor-

d4

da da-1

d4+1

da+1

a4

da+1 das1 da+1

d6+1 d6+1 d6

INNOO

2d4

2d4 2d4a

Heavy Armor-

d4+1 da+1 d6-1

d6+1 dB+1 d6

ds

a8

a8

d8+1 dag+1 d8+1

aNNOO 2d4a+1 2d4a+2 2d4a+1

Cost per 10 durabi
50K
75K
100K
250K
500K
100K 150K
200K

Defense Systems
Powerful jammers, countermeasures,
point-defense guns, gravity fields, and energy shields can all be fitted toa ship to protect it from enemy fire. Heavy armor, automated damage control, and redundancy are used to protect vital components.
Defense systems may be installed in command, electronics, or weapons compartments.

--s_y--
b

SdIHSI26dS

Armor (PL 6-8)

Armor allows a spaceship to make

an armor roll when it is struck and damaged. The cost of the armor de-

Fusion Age jet fighter

pends on three lactors: the size of the
spaceship (reflected in its total durability), the type of armor, and the amount of armor. See TABLE Gd2: SACESHIP ARMOR. Armor is mounted over the entirety of the ship, not on a

Chaff (PL 6) Chatf consists of millions of tiny strips of metallic fiber. It interferes with active sensors and missile seekers. Launchers positioned on the ship can instantly create a cloud of

checks, and missile attacks for the next round: Critical Failure, -2 bonus; Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, +1 penalty; Good, +2 penalty; Amazing, +3 penalty.
AtPL7, a jammer has the ability

single compartment,
Alloy armor consists of large quantities of super-tough metal alloys such as vanadium steel. Polymeric armor is composed of microengineered plastics. Cerametal is made from laminated ceramics

chaf particles in any threat sector. The defense system operator makes a System Operation--defenses skill check when deploying chatf. & successful result supplies the enemy's missile attack or sensor check with a
+1 penalty.

and lightweight metals. Neutronite

armor is an alloy composed of com- Damage Control (PL 6)

to scramble gravimetric frequencies, disturbing the use of mass detectors and mass transceivers. Modifiers are
cumulative with any others that
apply, including other defenses.
Point-Defense Gun (PL 6] This is an automated missile de-

pressed tungsten and disassociated
neutrons. Nanofluidic armor is a system of smart, liquid metals with ex-

When a spaceship compartment suifers excessive stun, wound, or mortal damage, the compartment may be

fense system that uses a barrage of slugs, laser bursts, or maser bolts to destroy incoming missiles before

traordinary conductivity and
memory characteristics.
A spaceship designer first selects the type of armor and then the amount of armor--light, moderate, or heavy. The armor's cost is found by cross-referencing this decision with the spaceship's total durability.
Armor may also have a durability cost, determined by the amount of armor selected. Light armor, regardless of the type, has no durability cost. Moderate armor costs 10% of the total durability of the ship (round down to the nearest whole number). Heavy armor costs 20% of the total ship durability (round down to the nearest whole number). This durability cost is subtracted from the ship's total durability rather than from an individual compartment.
# Example: Dave is designing a trader-class spaceship with a total durability rating of 24. He decides to purchase moderate alloy armor. The monetary cost is $450K (§150K for each 10 durability points or portion thereof). The durability cost is 2. (Ten percent of 24, rounded down, is 2.

required to make durability checks. they detonate. It can fire in all direcSee "Damage" later in this chapter. tions around a ship. If the user

Damage control systems provide a

makes a successful System Opera-

bonus to durability checks.

tion-defenses skill check, one incom-

Damage control systems come in three types: Ordinary, Good, and

ing missile is destroyed before impact.

Amazing. Each system requires |

If the point-defense gun is used as

durability of space, | power factor, a weapon, it has combat statistics

and protects a number of compart- equivalent to a laser cannon, but it

`ments whose total durability is 20 or does high impact (HI) damage.

less. Depending on the system's quality, a damage control system

Deflection Inducer

provides a -1, -2, or -3 bonus to dura- PL7) bility checks in the compartments it This inducer creates belts of gravita-

covers. The cost is $50K/$200K/$500Ktional force to deflect physical pro-

per system, respectively.

jectiles and bend beam weapons away from a ship. The inducer may

Jammer (PL 6)

provide a modifier to an attacker's

Also known as ECM, or electronic skill check depending on the result

countermeasures, a jammer system radiates confusing interference in

of a System Operation-defenses skill check: Critical Failure, -2 bonus;

the bandwidths commonly used for Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, +1

fire control and missile guidance. It's penalty; Good, +2 penalty; Amazing,

an active system typically controlled +3 penalty. These pendlties are by the communications officer. The doubled against attacks from nonofficer makes a System Operation- spaceship weapons.

communications skill check when

Each deflection system protects

jamming. The result of the check de- an area of 20 durability points. With-

149 termines the modifier to the enemy's out full coverage, a deflection induc-

sensor checks, communication

er provides no benefits.

Computer Core 50K

50K

Communications 10K

Defense

25K

Engineering

25K

Navigation

10K

Science

10K

Sensors

10K

Ablative Shield (PL 8) This defensive measure envelops its ship with a field of energy. Quantum particles absorb and dissipate attacks by massing as virtual matter. In each phase, the ship's engineer
devotes a number of power factors to
the unit (or units). Every point of mortal damage reduces the field by 3 points; every point of wound damage reduces the field by 2 points; every point of stun damage reduces the tield by 1 point. Primary damage absorbed in this fashion does not cause secondary damage.
Displacer (PL B) A refinement of the inertial flux en-
gine unit, the displacer calculates a
sequence of sale engine slides. When triggered, the ship executes a slide, moving a few hundred meters. The displacer may provide a modifier to an attacker's skill check depending on the result of a System Operation-defenses skill check: Critical Failure, -1 bonus; Marginal, +1 penalty; Ordinary. +2 penalty; Good, +3 penalty; Amazing, +4 penalty.
Communication Systems Comm systems take up little space, and can be located in either command or electronics compartments.
Laser Transceiver
(PL 6)
The laser transceiver uses an energy beam in the visual frequency range to transmit messages. While limited to the speed of light, the laser transceiver's advantage is that it is some-
15 what more difficult to jam, providing @ +2 penalty to enemy attempts.

Computer Core (PL 6)

All spaceships automatically in-

clude a Marginal computer core in

the ship's command compartment, at

no durability cost. It monitors all

w

ship systems, operates automated functions, and allows the crew fo in-

teract with the ship and control the

various systems from the command deck.

Purchasing a computer core of

better quality gives multiple bene-

fits. First, it provides more active

memory, just like a normal computer.

Also, a ship with a computer core of |=N=N-N-NO-Nrd-iNna-]ry or better quality can add
dedicated computer systems. See

Radio Transceiver
(PL 6)
The radio transceiver is a standard method of cheap communication. Unfortunately, it is limited to the speed of light--about 8 AU per hour, or 300,000 kilometers per second. In a tactical situation, that speed is practically instantaneous; for strategic

TaBLE G43: SHIPEOARD COMPUTER SysTEMS.
Ship computers at PL 6 are limited to Ordinary quality. At PL7, computers of Good and Amazing quality are
available--but these computers cost
more and take up more durability. It is possible to include more than one computer core in ship, given adequate financing and durability.

purposes, messages can take hours, days, or even longer to travel.

Dedicated Computer
Systems

Mass Transceiver
(PL 7)
`The mass transceiver uses crisscrossing gravity lines within a star system 1o transport messages in the form of cohesive graviton packets. The mass transceiver allows for instantaneous communication within a star system--but it can't be used in interstellar space.

Dedicated computer systems enhance the abilities of system operators, providing a bonus depending on their quality. Ordinary dedicated systems provide a -1 skill bonus but require an Ordinary computer core; Good dedicated systems provide a -2 bonus but require @ Good computer core; Amazing dedicated systems
provide a -3 bonus but require an
Amazing computer core.

Computer

The exact skill enhanced depends on the dedicated computer system:

Systems

Battle computers amplify the ac-

Spaceship compuler systems use most of the rules from Chapter 10: Computers in the Player's Handbook. Ship computers possess active memory equal to @ mainframe at their own Progress Level.
A ship's computer core can perform any computer functions, and most PL 7 ships take advantage of this by adding Al programs, including Al programs with autopilot functions.

curacy and power of weapon systems, providing a bonus to the
operator's System Operation-weap-
ons skill checks Communications computers assist
the reception, transmission, and jamming of communication signals, providing a bonus to the operator's
System Operation-communications
skill checks. Defense computers improve the
response and effectiveness of active defense systems, providing a bonus

Computer systems can be in-
stalled in command or electronics compartments. Like all networked
ship systems, the computer can be
controlled from a station in its compartment, or from the command deck.

o the operator's System Operation-- defenses skill checks.
Engineering computers improve shipboard monitoring and power mechanics, providing a bonus to the
operator's System Operation-engi-

neering skill.

Navigation computers assist in the calculation and ease of plotting courses through space or drivespace, providing a bonus to the operator's Navigation-system astrogation and

Cargo Systems
b These are storage facilities of one ----
kind or another. Cargo systems can only be put in cargo compartments.

drivespace astrogation skill checks.
Science computers appear in mul-
tiple formats (Life, Medical, Physical, and Technical) and assist the analysis and manipulation of a single science broad skill and its specialty skills. The computer provides a bonus to one of the following broad skills: Life Science, Medical Science,

Cargo Space (PL 6)

Each durability point assigned to

cargo space provides 24 cubic meters

of storage space--an area 2 meters

high, 3 meters wide, and 4 meters

deep. Cargo must be loaded and un-

or loaded manually, using a forklift

SdINS4dS

similar gear.

Physical Science, or Technical
Science.
Sensor computers enhance the sensitivity and analytical capabilities of sensor systems, providing a bonus to the operator's System Operation-sensors skill checks.

Drive relay
or exploration ships carry a lab section in order to analyze and record their findings.
Passenger Suite

Fuel Tank (PL 6) Ships relying on fusion generators or grav-fusion cells for power, or fusion torches or ion engines for thrust, must carry a large volume of hydrogen as fuel. For each of these units that a ship possesses, it must also

Crew Systems
These are systems or facilities designed for use by the ship's crew. Crew systems may be added to crew

(PL B) Many ships are equipped to carry passengers in relative luxury. A passenger suite consists of a first-class stateroom, a lounge and dining

carry one fuel tank. For example, a ship with three fusion generators (6 durability points) also needs a 3point fuel tank.
A fuel tank, using this standard

or command compartments,

toom, and a high-quality galley. Each durability point assigned ac-

ratio, contains enough fuel to provide 10 weeks of continuous opera-

Crew Quarters (PL 6) Crew quarters include basic quar-

commodates two passengers in excellent quarters or four passengers

tion for one of these units. Less than
full tanks or additional tanks alter

ters and mess facilities. Each dura- in moderate comfort.

this duration accordingly.

bility point allotted to crew quarters allows the ship to quarter six per sons with private bunks, mess faci ties, washrooms, and lounges. Truly spartan quarters, with rotating bunks and little more, can uncomfortably accommodate ten people with each durability point
Its worth noting that space may

The purchase of a passenger suite

automatically includes a supply of

Hangar [PL 6)

ship stores--iood, air, and water--for Hangars act as vehicle storage,

its occupants that will last a total of launch, and recovery facilities, Each

10 weeks. Additional 20-week stores hangar's capacity varies--for each

cost $5,000 and 1 durability point per durability point assigned to hangar

passenger suite.

space, the hangar can carry 1 dura-

Optionally, for 1 durability point, bility point worth of space vehicles,

1ows of seats can be constructed for or 2 durability points of standard ve-

exist lo cram dozens or possibly even up to twenty people. This tight seat- hicles such as cars or jets. For ex-

hundreds of people aboard a ship for abrief time, Crew quarters and passenger suites make it possible to live on the ship.

ing isn't comfortable, but it's handy for transporting a large number of people over short distances.
Heroes who sell passage on their

ample, a hangar with a durability of 10 can carry two skycars and a semi truck, or even a small spacecraft such as a launch or a fighter.

Each unit of crew quarters automatically includes a supply of ship stores--food, air, and water--for its occupants that will last a total of 10 weeks. An additional 20 weeks of ship stores costs $5,000 and 1 durability point per crew quarters,

starship should consider hiring an

The hangar bay includes facilities

extra crewman or two to cook, clean,

for engine repair, fueling, and other

and look after the passengers--most common maintenance tasks. With

people expect first-rate service for

the advent of energy field technology

their money.

at PL8, a hangar bay can launch and

recover vehicles without opening its

Sick Bay [PL 6)

atmosphere to space.

Lab Section (PL 6) A lab section includes @ small suite of offices, laboratories, conference rooms for up to four technicians, and an Ordinary quality science computet (see "Computer Systems," above) desigried to support extensive re-

This is a comprehensive care and
treatment facility with operating
areas, scanning equipment, a built-
in medical computer and database, and recovery rooms for up to four patients. Larger sick bays can accommodate an additional four patients per additional durability point as-

Autacargao (PL 7] The autocargo unit features standard cargo space fitted with powered handling gear and access hatches for rapid loading and unloading. Container systems and ro-ro (roll om, roll off) cargo facilities fall

search and experimentation. The section includes databases on most

signed. At PL 6, the sick bay provides a2 bonus to a Medical Science skill

into this category. The autocargo unit requires power only during loading

scientific fields, plus instrumentationcheck. At PL7, this bonus improves and unloading.

5]

and recording devices. Many survey to-3.

--prsry

b Weapor

Avail Cost Dur Pow Acc Range Type

Progress Level 6: Fu: n Age

Laser cannon IR laser Launch rack

Con 100K
250K 50K

vam En (e) 2/4/6 En [e)

Launch tube

100K

100K

10/2030 L (@

SPACESHIPS

50K

B16/24 L @)

S00K

10/2030 En (g)

Missile,

il 100K

18/16/24 HI (g)

Rail cannon

Res S00K

a2

HI (p)

Turret

Com 100K

X-ray laser

il 350K W=-pNhoOOOWDoOOWONOVWO6=/N9=nn En (e)

Progress Level 7: Gravity Age

Mass cannon Con 300K

s101s L (p)

Mass converter Res TM Matter torpedo Res 600K

3/6/9 En (e) 2/510 En ()

Missile, MRB Res 200K

10/2030

Particle beam Res S00K

61218

Plasma cannon Mil 400K

4/8/16

Tractor beam Con S00K nwhorUuNAeNLAOW6/9

Progress Level 8: Energy Age

En (g) En (e) En ()
En (e)

EM tarpedo

Res 450K E]

Kinetic lance Mil 750K 2

Maser cannon Con 400K a

IBNS En (g)
s10/20 HI [e) 612/20 En (e)

Damage

Actions

d4s/daw/da 2w d4+15/da+1W/dB+Tw As load As load dBs/2d4a+1s/dd+Bw d8s/d6+1wW/dd+1m
2d6s/2d6w/2dEm
d6+25/d6+20/d6 +dw 2d4s/d6+28w/da+1m NOOOO~NbB As weapon. d6+1s/dd+2w/dam Iy

d6+2s/d6+1W/d6+3w W d6+35/d6+3n/d6+2m 2d6s/2d6wW/d6+3m 2d4a+1s/2daw/d8+1m
d6+3s/d4+1m/d4+3m d6+2w/d8+2w/dB+1m See description
NnwNONN

d6+3s/2dBs/dd+Bw )
da+1w/2daw/da+3m d6+2w/d4+1m/dB+2m
[T

Weapons Systems
All weapons are installed facing in one of four directions--forward, port, starboard, or aft. (Since the visual combat system works on a flat plane, up and down aren't considered.) In order to increase a weapon's arc of fire, it must be installed in a turret. Otherwise, the weapon is hardmounted on the ship facing in the stated direction.
Since missile systems are guided,
it's not necessary to use a turret or
determine the missile system's arc.
Laser Cannon (PL 6) `The most basic weapon system available, a laser uses power to excite a fluorescent medium, and then directs the light created in a powerful beam
IR Laser (PL 6) An improvement of the standard laser cannon, an infrared laser operates at low wavelengths and tends
152to transfer more heat, with less cut-

ting power, than a standard laser. Its
invisible beam is more coherent than a laser cannon's emission, has longer range, and can deliver more energy to the target.
Launch Rack [PL 6) The launch rack is a one-shot storage and firing facility for missiles. It is a box or bundle of missile canisters mounted externally on the ship hull. The rack carries eight missiles. The weapon's damage. range, and accuracy are determined by the type of missiles carried. Consider missiles to attack in the same phase in which they're fired, with no maneuvering or guidance required.
Missile racks can't be reloaded during combat, and there's no way to change the selection of missiles in a hunry. Reloading can only be done in a port, or through extravehicular activity. Missiles must be purchased separately from the launch rack.
Launch Tube [PL 6) This is a missile storage and firing system that consists of @ magazine

and a launch rail. The basic system takes up 3 durability points and holds @ magazine of up to ten missiles; each additional durability point assigned costs $50K and adds a capacity for five more missiles. For example, a 5-point launch tube sys-
tem can hold up to twenty missiles.
Like the launch rack, the combat characteristics of the system depend on the missiles carried. Unlike the Iaunch rack, the launch tube can be loaded as desired during combat. Missiles must be purchased separately.
Missile, ARN (PL 6) The antiradiation missile homes in on enemy radar or jamming transmissions. Ignore any penalties caused by enemy jamming; instead, antiradiation missiles gain a -2 `bonus to attack ships using jammers or radar.
Missile, CHE (PL 6) This conventional, high-explosive
missile features a smart warhead
with directional blast and fragmen-

Weapon:

other of particles, causing an uncontrolled corrosive reaction of severe eifect. In addition, the mass convert-
b= er ignores the effect of a deflection
S inducer

Matter Torpeda (PL 7)

The matter torpedo is a charged war-

head that creates a massive implo-

sion on impact. A simple accelerator,

included in the system's cost, is used

to throw the warhead Although the torpedo

at its target has a relative-

SdIHS14d

ly short range, its damage potential

is extraordinary.

Missile, MRB (PL 7) The socially acceptable version of the nuke is the mass-reaction burst warhead. The device forces the abrupt decay of a small amount of dark matter, resulting in a powerful blast of light, heat, and short-lived radiation.

Particle Beam (PL 7) `This device is a linear accelerator that fires blasts of atomic particles. Most use protons or neutrons, since these heavy particles tend to inflict `more damage to the target

tation features designed to maximize Turret (PL 6)

its chances of inflicting significant
damage
Missile, NUK (PL 6)
Nuclear devices are under strict control in most societies, even in the {ar future. The nuclear missile gains an accuracy bonus because it doesn't have to hit dead on; getting within a dozen kilometers can do the job.

Mounting a weapon in a turret allows it to fire into three of the four axes of fire, instead of just one. Turrets always have a "blind spot" of at least one arc. The ship designer can select which arcs each turret faces.
Mounting a weapon in a turret adds to the weapon's durability and cost. Since the turret's machinery and support systems take up space, itis bulkier than an equivalent hard-

Missile, SMP (PL 5)

mounted weapon.

The submunition pack missile carries a bundle of depleted uranium or neutronite penetrators that deploy in abroad area. Due to the extremely high velocities involved, each penetrator strikes with an immense amount of kinetic energy.

X-Ray Laser [PL 6) This nasty device uses a laser process to create and direct a focused beam of high-energy x-rays. It causes more damage than the standard laser or IR cannon.

Mass Cannon [PL 7)

Rail Cannon (PL 6)

A larger and more powerful version

The rail cannon is an electromagnet- of the hand-held mass weapons, a

icaccelerator that fires projectiles at mass cannon fires a ripple of intense

high velocities. The cannon typically gravity waves, striking its target like

teleatses projectiles in groups in

amassive physical blow.

order to create a shotgun effect on

the target, Compared to other weapons of the era, the rail cannon is power-hungry and inaccurate, but it can be deadly at close ranges.

Mass Converter (PL 7) This unusual device manipulates the nature of matter at a distance. It forces the target's atoms to strip each

Plasma Cannon (PL 7) This weapon converts an electrochemical mixture into white-hot plasma and then uses a magnetic accelerator to throw a jet or blast of the plasma at the target. The superheated plasma mixture explosively vaporizes when it hits a target
Tractor Beam (PL 7) An application of gravitic technology, the tractor beam allows vessels. to manipulate--by attracting or repelling--objects outside their hull For every 3 power factors devoted to the tractor beam, an acceleration of 0.25 Mpp can be applied to a target.
Use of the tractor beam requires a successful System Operation-weapons skill check. Unless the target's ability to accelerate is effectively
countered, the target can escape
from the tractor beam with a Moderate maneuver. No vessel can apply a tractor beam to a ship with greater durability than its own.

EM Torpedo

(PL 8B)

This weapon utilizes a specialized

electromagnetic-pulse warhead

powered by a fusion redction. It's

useful for incapacitating enemy s without destroying them

15

Kinetic Lance (PL B) ju----_A modification of the ablative shield
p technology, a kinetic lance creates a spear of virtual particles that simulate solid matter. It can punch or batter holes through solid neutronite, since the kinetic lance can imitate degenerate stellar matter.

cluding the system's range and pow-
er requirements.
» Communications: Use this
space to record the ship's communi-
cation systems, including the system's range and power requirements.
» Computer: Record the computer's quality and characteristics here.

Maser Cannon (PL 8) The Ship Status Record Form The maser cannon creates blasts of
electromagnetic energy--light, heat,

SPACESHIPS
«and radiation--with a linear anten-

As well as a place for recording the

na array. It combines accuracy, ar-

basic facts about what a ship con-

`mor penetration, and hitting power. tains, you need a way to keep track

of who's running the various systems

The Ship Design Record Form

and how the ship is faring in combat. The Ship Status Record Form, on page 253, serves this purpose. It con-

A ship has its own vital statistics

tains two sections:

that describe how well it moves, fights, and withstands damage.

Command Crew

These statistics are recorded on the
Ship Design Record Form on page 252, The most important entries on this form are described below.
» Maneuver rating: This is the

In the top section of the form, jot down the compariment where each station and system is located, along with the name of the character who's operating each station and his or her

number determined from TaLE G38; a SHIP MANEUVERABILITY. It provides modifier to all Vehicle Operation checks during maneuvers.

relevant skill scores. For example, a hero manning the ship's weapons station would note her System Operation-weapons skill score.

» Acceleration and Cruising speed: A spaceship's acceleration Damage Diagrams

and cruising speed can be deter-

Most of the Ship Status Record Sheet

`mined from TABLE G9: Sip ACCELERiAs t-aken up by damage diagrams--

TION & CRUISING SPEED.

enough to describe a ship of as many

» Weapons: Write down the name as 12 compartments. On the line fol-

and the vital stats for any weapon

lowing a compartment's number,

systems the ship carries, including write in the function of that compart-

the weapon's accuracy, range, dam- ment (command, crew, cargo, etc).

age type, damage amount, and max

The durability rating of a compart-

actions per round, and any special notes. Indicate which way each

ment goes into the circle next to the "M" (since this number also repre-

weapon faces by marking the appr sents the compartment's mortal

priate section of the small crosshair diagram (forward = top section, aft =
bottom, starboard = right, or port =

points). Next to the "S" and the "W," write in twice the compartment's

left). » Armor and Defenses: Record the

ship's armor type and the armor's

values against low impact (LI), high

impact (HI), and energy (En) weapons. Write down any defensive systems the ship carries, including their

power requirements.

» Engines: Record the type and size of the engines, along with the

number of power factors converted to

movement points.

» Power plant: Note how many

power factors are generated by the

ship's reactors.

154» Sensors: Use this space to record the ship's sensor systems, in-

mortal rating, representing the compartment's stun and wound points.
Working from rightto left on each line of boxes, blacken the boxes that won't be needed to keep track of that compartment's damage, leaving open a number of boxes equal to the the number to the left of the first box. When a ship is struck by enemy fire, record damage in these open boxes to show the current status of each
compartment.
Stock Versions of Common Spaceships |
When your hero first purchases or acquires a starship, it's likely that he begins with a stock, unmodified
`model of that type. These vessels
begin with predesignated systems, which can then be modified or replaced by the hero at some later date. In some cases, the hero may be able to buy (or salvage) an exten-
sively customized vessel, but there
should be a backstory or adventure associated with the acquisition.
Stock vessels are described in Chapter 12: Vehicles in the Player'
Handbook.
Customizing Spacecraft
Customizing a ship involves upgrad-
ing, replacing, or adding new systems to improve its capabilities. For example, a light freighter rigged for fighting can easily defeat a stock light freighter. All the hero needs is
money, time, and access to a facility
that can do the work he wants done. Of course, the availability of certain systems--especially weapon sys-
tems--is something to consider as
well.

Remaving Old

Systems
`The first step in customizing a ship is
getting rid of old systems. Any system may be removed, but some are

--=
»

harder to replace than others:

System Removal Cost Time

Cargo

50% 1 wh/dur

Comm

10% 1 wh/dur

Computer 10% 4 whidur

Crew.

10% 1 wi/dur

Defense 10% 2 whidur

SdIHS3I6dS

Drive 50% 8 wh/dur

Engine 50% 6 wkidur

Power 25% 4 wlddur

Sensor 10% Support 25% Weapon 10%

4 whidur
2 whidur SPACESHIP 2 whidur MOovVEMENT

Adriveship cannot reenter drivespace immediately after making starall; it needs to accumulate a

Removal Cost is what it costs to
strip a system from a compartment,
expressed as a percentage of the original cost of the old system. The
cost of installing a new system is in-
cluded in the cost of the new system. Time is how long it takes to either
temove or install a system of the listed type, expressed in weeks per durability point of the system. Systems without a durability cost take 1 week to install. Empty or unused compartments don't need to be removed before a new system can be installed. The time requirement assumes that the overhaul is performed in a complete repair facility.
Systems removed from a ship may be resold at 10% to 80% (d8 X 10) of their original purchase price, provided someone is interested in buying the used equipment. Badly damaged or wrecked systems may be worthless, suitable only for scrap valued at2% to 12% (2d6) of original price.

Tsinphtaeecrrepeclataanrfeettaformyu,rofovrraebmmiteasle, noaftnr--defecirnoentmceerbsfatoet.rllartdna,anaucdtrhuinyrtagholenlyreiecafcdochirhseassruicgpbaeamnt'eetthrbgianeet ndiscstroedi.rveidseT.ssaTippchahaucsty,eeoadns

Interstellar Movement
In a starfaring campaign, a sector map shows the region of space in

long interstellar voyage on board a driveship consists of a series of 5day starfalls through the empliness of drivespace, interspersed with a few days in real space.
The exact recharge time is ran-

which spaceships move strategically. See Chapter 14: Campaign Architecture for information on how to build campaigns and design sector

dom. In game terms, you can determine the exact time of recharge by one of three means. You can simply roll d4 and add 1 for a number of

`maps for your setting.
Vessels of Progress Level 6, the Fusion Age, are not capable of fasterthan-light travel. This means

days. Or, for a more precise measurement, roll 7d12+36 for a number of hours, Finally, you may allow an engineer to attempt to decrease the

that travel times between stars are

time by analysis of tachyonic density

measured in years or decades, not weeks or months. For the purposes of

and plotting of ship movement Allow the hero to make a System Op-

running a game in such a setting,
you can assume that the heroes spend their time in cold sleep. Move-
ment from star to star happens be-

eration-engineering skill check. The result reduces the recharge time: Ordinary, 6412436 hours, Good, 5d12+36 hours, Amazing 4d12+36 hours. (As a

tween adventures in this type of

rank benefit, allow a hero with 4 or

Adding New Systems Toinstall a new system in a spacecraft, a hero must first find a place where the system can be purchased and then find a facility that can install t. In many cases, these are one and the same, but sometimes a ship captain may be able to salvage a system from a wrecked ship and still need to find someone to install it,
Remember, the cost of installation isincluded in the system's base cost. Iithe hero is going to do the installation work, knock 20% off the cost of purchase. On the other hand, i the
hero owns an intact system but
needs someone to put it in, use the removal cost described above.

game, since the heroes won't have more ranks in engineering to reduce

`many decisions to make while

the roll by an additional d12,)

they're waiting to get to the next star

The nature of the cycle time and

system.

the submergence into drivespace

The Stardrive

means that all ships have the same travel time for jumps of 5 light-years

The stardrive propulsion system is

or less--$ days. Stardrives powered

feature of Progress Level 7 technolo- by larger mass reactors show their

gy. and is considered the baseline advantage in the long haul. A small

for interstellar travel in the ALTERNITshYip has to make five or ten jumps to

game system. The device allows a

cover 50 light-years, each requiring §

ship to span vast distances during a days plus several days of downtime,

5-day submergence in drivespace. to cover the distance a huge ship can

During this period, the vessel exists cover in one submergence.

in a featureless void, unable to inter- Ships of Progress Level 8 or higher

act with the rest of the universe. Its

may use alternate propulsion sys-

destination is fixed upon entrance, and it can't leave drivespace until the 5-day period has elapsed.

tems even more astounding than the
133 stardrive, The drivewave described
earlier in this chapter is an example.

Interplanetary

----_M--ovement
p Interplanetary travel, while expensive and slow, is within the recch of technologies available in the late twentieth century. Travel within star system may be the limit of the technology available to heroes, or it may be the medium between a planet's surface and the great gap be-

tween the stars.

SPACESHIPS

A ship moving between planets

isn't just sailing the seas from one

port to another. It's really in another

orbit--around the star. The space-

cratt of the Fusion Age (PL 6) have

enough power to continuously alter
this orbit, driving along an intercept

course to the intended destination.

For game purposes, ships {ly

through planetary systems just as

airplanes cross continents, ignoring
the complex astrogation and looping

intercept orbits that are required to

reach another planet. Given this as-

sumption, the best way to deal with

spacecraft moving in interplanetary
space is to consider their cruising speed in AU per hour.

One astronomical unit is 150 mil-

lion kilometers--the distance from the Earth to the Sun. Most inner-sys-

tem journeys require spacecratt to

travel anywhere from 1 to 10 AU.

For simplicity, use the cruising

speed determined for a spaceship when determining how long it takes

1o travel within a system. Realisti-

cally, of course, the only limit on a

conventional engine speed, given sufficient time to accelerate, is the

speed of light. During its trip, the

ship accelerates past its cruising

speed, but halfway through the trip it

must decelerate. A ship's cruising

speed is actually its average speed for the duration of the trip.

TAaBLE G4A5:

Prevailing Condition Hazardous Crowded Normal Clear

PL6 Range
3d6 x 0.1
6d6 x 0.1
6d6+20 x 0.1
3d6

PL 7+ Range
d6 3d6 [ 6d6+20

All measurements are in megameters (Mm).

Progress Level 6 ships average a

Roll indicates the travel time be-

cruising speed of 0.1 AU per hour. In tween any two points in « system, if

the Fusion Age, acceleration is

you have no idea or inclination to

tough. Even with viscous-fluid tanks, figure out just where a particular

drugs, and other countermeasures, planet is in relation to another.

humans can'l tolerate more than about 30 g.
The use of artificial gravity to counter the effects of acceleration al-

Planetary Alignment
Any two bodies in a solar system can be described as being in conjunc-

lows ships of PL 7 to accelerate at as- tion, in opposition, or somewhere in tonishing rates. Most PL 7 ships can between. Planets in conjunction are

change their speed by about 1 million kph (or | megameter per phase) with each phase of acceleration. Such acceleration allows them to

aligned on one side of their star, or close to it. Planets in opposition are on opposite sides of the star.
To figure out the distance between

reach much higher speeds in reason- two planets in conjunction, find the

able time. The faster Gravity Age

difference in their orbital radii; to

ships cruise at about 1 AU per hour or 0.15˘ (light speed).
Here are some guidelines for de-

figure out the distance between planets in opposition, take the sum; and for anything else, take 80% or

termining the travel time between

90% of the sum.

two points in a system:

# Example: A group of heroes are

on Venus, which orbits at 0.7 AU, and

Average

they want to go to Jupiter, which or-

PL Spoed Roll

bits at 5 AU. If the planets are in con-

5 13months 10d12monthsjunction, or generally on the same

6 1l0hours d20days side of the Sun, the trip should be

7 lhour 312 hours about 4.3 AU; if they're in opposition,

8 hour

1d12 hours the trip should be roughly 5.7 AU:

and in any other alignment, assume

Average Speed is the vessel's velocity in astronomical units in the

the trip is 80% to 90% of 5.7, or about SAU.

given time frame.

System
CE passive array
EM detector IR detector Mass detector
LETETS
air/space multiband multiphase
156

SKil Check (0/G/A) 50 Mm/100 Mm/150 Mm 30 Mm/60 Mm/90 Mm 2 Mm/4 Mm/6 Mim 10 Mm/50 Mm/100 Mm
10 M/20 Mimv40 Mm 30 MM/60 Mm/90 Mim 40 Mm/B0 Mm/120 Mm

TABLE GA7: SpPACE DETECTION
MopiFiERS

Obscurity Modifier

Critical

+3

1t you need to know where one

Combat

planet is in relation to another, just
1oll randomly to see if it is in con-
junction, opposition, or somewhere

Movement A ship moving at a very high speed

b

in between. The next time the heroes is almost impossible to bring to a

need to go to that particular world fight. However, the primary concern

again, simply reroll.

is how fast the ships can accelerate

and move relative to one another. In

Orbital Movement

PL 6, ships travel at relative speeds of about 1 to S megameters per phase (100,000 to 500,000 kph).

The transition between system travel AtPL7, ships can fight and ma-

and planetary travel is orbital, or

neuver effectively at speeds of 1 to 10

SdINSII4dS

near-space, movement. A ship in a stable orbit doesn't have o expend

megameters per phase (1 to 10 million kilometers per hour).

any energy to remain there; it contin-
ues to fall around the planet forever. Climbing to Earth orbit from the atmosphere requires a spacecrat to accelerate to a speed of roughly 24 kilometers per phase (24,000 kph) and an altitude of 200 km. Lower orbits are possible, but below 100 km the increasing resistance of the at-
mosphere guarantees that the orbit
is short-lived An orbit can circle a planet in any
direction; many satellites use a polar orbit, which means that over time the entire planet will rotate underneath their flight path. Another interesting orbit is the geosynchronous orbit, in which the ship or satellite matches the planet's rotation speed; the ship hovers over one spot on the planet's

SPACESHIP ComBAT
To resolve combat between spacecrat, use the vehicle combat system described in the preceding chapte with a few exceptions. The most significant of these is how a spacecrait takes damage; a spaceship isn'ta vehicle with one set of stun, wound, and morlal ratings, but a collection of separate compartments and systems, each with its own ability to withstand punishment. There are a few other details to handle the unique setling of space as a battletield, which are discussed below.

Cometary approach
Opening Range As in vehicle combat, the opening range of the fight depends on the prevailing conditions. You can set the range to accommodate the needs of the story or the situation that started the combat, or determine the range randomly. TABLE Gd5: SPACESHIP 6 OPENING RANGE is divided into a PL column for low-tech, near-space combat, and a PL 7+ column for high-
tech, open-space combat.
Hazardous conditions include entering or leaving a crowded space station or starport; crowded condi-
tions include ships meeting in low orbit, a ring system, or an asteroid
field; normal conditions reler to high

the Fight surface. The radius
nous orbit is based

of a geosynchroon the planet's

Setting

up

mass and rate of rotation; for Earth,

orbit or the inner part of a solar system; clear conditions include inter planetary space in the outer portions

it's close 10 35,800 kilometers. The orbital altitude would be lot lower around a world with a faster rotation.

First, you'll need to make the same
decision you've already thought about for vehicle combat. Do you want to run this scene in narrative

of a star system, or interstellar space.
All measurements are in megameters (Mm). See the "Measurements" sidebar on page 155

Orbital maneuvers are a routine matter in advanced spacefaring settings. Any spaceship capable of interplanetary travel can assume the orbit of its choice when it arrives at a new world and maneuver to any new orbit in @ matter of minutes. Assume that @ minor adjustment to an orbit requires 5d6 minutes for PL 6 ships,

style? Then you'll use the rules for opening range, speeds, and intentions for each vehicle. If you intend to depict this as a visual scene, you'll need to use a hex map and you'll need to set a scale.

aDnedtecPtuiorns,uitEvasi
In general, detection ranges are much greater than the opening ranges listed above. See TABLE G the Seacestip DETECTION RANGE. Even best long-range weapons can't equal the range at which sensors allow

or d6 minutes for PL 7 spacecraft.

Major adjustments take twice as

long. Ii the vessel is attempting to

assume a very specific or difficult

orbit, a Vehicle Operation or Naviga-

tion skill check may be appropriate

for the hero attempting the action. Leaving Earth orbit requires an
acceleration up to about 34 kilome-

Hazardous

d4 x 0.1 Mpp d6 x 0.1 Mpp da+2 x 0.1 Mpp 2d6 x 0.1 Mpp

ters per phase (34,000 kph). This is

d6+4 x 0.1 Mpp d6 x 1 Mpp

known as escape velocity. Once a

2d6+2 X 0. Mpp 2d6 X 1 Mpp

ship leaves orbit, its in interplane-

tary space.

157

= one ship to detect another. One ship or the other might decide to evade

the approach, down to 50 or 100 meters per phase for the final approach

the battle by turning away as soon and less than a walking pace for the

b as athreat is detected.

actual touchdown or connection.

Detection may be modified by the

Next, take a look at the circum-

bility" of the sensor involved-- stances that led to the scene and de-

radar is less effective in crowded cide what direction each spaceship

conditions or near asteroids, IR and is heading, If one spaceship pursued

EM detectors may suffer near stars or the other, then the fleeing spaceship

civilized planets, and so on. At your begins with an intent to open or

discretion, apply modifiers from

break, while the pursuer begins with

`TaBLE G47: SpACE DETECTION MODIFIERanSintent to close. If the vessels were

check. SPACESHIPS to the operator's skill

paralleling each other, both might

AFailure result indicates that the begin with the intent o hold. Natu-

sensor operator didn't detect the ap- rally, intentions may change n the

proaching threat until the enemy

first phase of maneuvering.

was actually in combat range; see

In the visual style, think of it this

TABLE G45: SPACESHIP OPENING RANGE. way: An intent to close means that

On a Critical Failure, the sensor op- the vehicle is heading toward its op-

erator didn't detect the enemy at ll,

ponent, an intent o open or break

and the enemy may be able to

means that it's heading away from

achieve surprise. See "Surpris: below.

its opponent, and an intent to hold `means that it's heading off to one.

It @ vehicle spots an opponent be- side or matching speeds.

fore it gets within combat range, it

may to choose to flee and avoid combat. Compare the speed and acceler-

Surprise

ation of the vehicles. If the fleeing The rules and considerations dis-

vehicle is faster, it will get away. It the pursuing vehicle s faster, it will eventually catch up and force a combat scene. You may allow special

cussed for surprise in vehicular com-
bat apply to spaceship combat. As in the case of land and air vehicles, the surprised spaceship doesn't stand

conditions or the use of special tactics to evade the attack.

still during the surprise phase; spends the surprise phase moving

forward at its present speed.

Beginning Intentions

Tactics-space tactics is the appropriate skill for setting up a spaceship ambush. The success of the

When setting up a space combat, the ambush leader's Tactics check in-

first thing you need to know is the

flicts @ +1, 42, or +3 penaity to the

opening speed for the spacecraft in- victim's System Operation-sensors

volved. You may already know this

check to avoid surprise. Of course, a

because of the situation that caused spaceship that has already detected

the combat, but if you don't, here are a would-be ambusher (see "Detec-

some guidelines 1o help you set it up. tion," above) can't be surprised.

`The opening speeds of the space-

In addition, the prevailing condi-

cratt involved depend on the prevail- tion may provide a penalty or bonus.

ing condition and how advanced the Hazardous conditions provide a +2

ships are. See TABLE Gd8: SPACESHIPpenalty to the victim's System Oper-

OPENING SPEEDS. Remember that Mpp stands for

ation-sensors check. Crowded condi-
tions add a +1 pendlty. Normal

megameters per phase. One Mpp is equal to 1 million kilometers per

conditions apply no modifier, and clear conditions provide the victim

hour (kph), or 0.001c. That's slow for

with a -2 bonus.

most space vehicles of PL 7; cruising

speed is closer to 0.4 or 0.5c. Of course, it's unrealistic for anything moving that fast to be engaged in
combat.
It's worth noting that ships close to planets or in the process of docking or leaving dock travel even slower. These ships may be going no faster
138than 1 or 2 kilometers per phase on

Scale
It you wish to use the visual scene presentation, you need to set a scale.
In each phase, a spacecraft moves a number of megameters (Mm) equal
to its megameters per phase (Mpp).
To keep this scale usable for a standard hex sheet, you should probably use a scale of 0.1 Mm per hex for

battles between low-tech (PL 6) spacecrat and high-tech spacecrat
in hazardous or crowded conditions,
and 1 Mm per hex for advanced (PL 7+) spacecraft in open space.
The Action
Round Spacecratt combat uses the same `modifications to the action round described under "Vehicle Combat" in the previous chapter. Pilots and helmsmen may attempt Routine ma-
neuvers during each phase, but Mod-
erate and Extreme maneuvers
require an action.
It a spaceship's engines aren't supplied with any power or have become damaged and nonfunctional, it
can't attempt maneuvers or acceleration of any kind. It continues to move
at its present velocity until the engines become functional or the ship hits something.
Narrative Combat
Spaceship combat works just as described in "Vehicle Combat" in Chapter 10: Vehicles with a few exceptions. Routine maneuvers are allowed every phase. To change
intentions requires a Moderate or Ex-
treme maneuver. Acceleration is allowed as part of any maneuver.
In the early years of PL 6, space combat is largely impossible, since tactical acceleration and turning are technologically infeasible. By the end of PL 6, spacecrait can attempt Routine and Moderate maneuvers,
but can't attempt Extreme maneu-
vers. Since these ships are driven by reaction drives, they have nothing to push against in their maneuvers. They fly like rockets, not airplanes.
Spaceships of PL 7 and higher have engine systems that dig into the gravitational fields around them, allowing them to perform hard banks, loops, and other such maneuvers.
sual Combat
Spaceships use a standard hex map
for visual combat, just as vehicles do. Instead of using intentions, each grade of maneuver (Routine, Moderate, and Extreme) allows certain ma-
neuvers to be performed. Most of
these maneuvers and their diagrams

arelisted in the "Vehicle Maneuvers Visualized" sidebar on page 136 in
the previous chapter. One maneuver is unique to space-
ships: spin ship. As a Routine ma-
neuver, spin ship imposes no penalty
on the pilot or helmsman. » Spin ship: The spacecraft can
spin to face any direction desired while keeping its present course and speed, but it must spin back to match its original facing before it can at-
fempt any other combat maneuvers.
Ships of PL 6 are limited to the following maneuvers: spin ship and
turn (Routine maneuvers); tight turn
and regain control (Moderate maneuvers, +1 penalty). In order to slow down, the pilot must perform the spin ship maneuver so the vessel is fiying backward and accelerate in the opposite direction to decrease ils velocity. Multiple phases of acceleration may be necessary before a vehicle changes the number of hexes it tavels in a phase.
Ships of PL 7 and later have a wider choice of maneuvers: bank, 1oll, spin ship, and turn (Routine maneuvers); halt-loop, long roll, regain control, and tight turn (Moderate maneuvers, +1 penalty); hard bank and loop and turn (Extreme maneuvers,
+3 penalty). Ships using the spin
ship maneuver can't attempt any other maneuvers while they're facing away from their line of flight. A spaceship can fly sideways or backward if its pilot wants to, but it must square its nose with its course before the pilot can resume normal maneuvering. This maneuver might be useful in bringing weapons to bear on enemies who would otherwise be outside their are of fire.

TABLE G49:
SKi Check Result Critical Failure Failure Ordinary Good Amazing
To determine who moves when in each phase, you'll need to determine who has the advantage. Each round, the pilot with the best action check result has the advantage. In the event of a tie, the pilot with the supe-
rior action check score has the
advantage. In each phase, the pilot with the
advantage can choose to move his spaceship first or to allow his opponent to move first instead. Moving
first might allow a spaceship to get
into a good position to shoot before the enemy responds, or to get out of the enemy's sights before he can take his move. Moving second offers a pilot the chance to see where the
enemy is going before committing to any movement.
A pilot keeps the advantage until he fails a maneuver check. When this happens, the advantage automatically shifts 1o the opponent. The advantage might shift back and forth several times in the course of single round.
Pilot Skills
Whether the spaceship is a small space fighter or a formidable corvette, Vehicle Operation-space vehicle is the skill used by the pilot or helmsman. During each phase of combat, the pilot selects the maneuvers that guide the spacecrat, thus moving for a better position to shoot and not get shot.
Copilot Skills
The copilot or junior helmsman has the ability to take over for the pilot at any time. Piloting from the copilot's station imposes a +1 penalty. However, if the copilot takes an action to assist the pilot's maneuvering, a modifier may be applied to the pilot's next skill check. The result of the copilots Vehicle Operation-space vehicle check determines the modifier: Critical Failure, +1 penally; Fail-

Outcome
Major spin Spin
Yaw
Under control Under control

JE----
p

bonus; ure, no modifier; Ordinary, -1

SdINSTOHAS

Good, -2 bonus; Amazing, -3 bonus.

Failing a Vehicle Operation Check
A pilot or helmsman who fails a Vehicle Operation skill check may or
`may not complete his maneuver as
intended. He must immediately attempt a second Vehicle Operation skill check (applying any appropriate bonus or penalty) and consult SPACE- TABLE G49: LOSING CONTROL OF A stip. The possible outcomes are described below. In addition to what's discussed here, the Gamemaster may decide that when a spaceship goes out of control, it suffers some sort of mechanical breakdown that
could prevent it from functioning
properly or even render it useless until repairs are made.
Maijor spin: The spacecrat goes into a spin as noted below, and the pilot suffers a +4 penalty on all at-
tempts to regain control. All charac-
ters in the vessel suffer a +2 penalty to any actions they attempt. If the ship is near a large object such as a station, asteroid, or planet, the Gamemaster can decide that a crash may occur.
Spin: The spaceship goes wildly out of control. The spin continues until the helmsman is able to make a successhul Vehicle Operation-space vehicle skill check. Roll d8 to determine the direction the spaceship ends up facing when the spin ends: 1 - forward; 2 = forward! right; 3 = right; 4 = backward/right; 5 = backward; 6 = backward/left; 7 = left; 8 = forward/left. The pilot can't do anything else until he manages to regain control of the spacecratt (by making a successful Vehicle Operation check), and all characters in the vessel--including the pilot--suffer a +2 penalty
to any actions they attempt.
1i the operator of a spaceship
150 that's already in a spin fails another

----
p
SPACESHIPS

Attack and
Defense
Using a spaceship system to attack or to defend against an attack requires an action on the part of some character in the spaceship. A weapons officer can operate the weapons any time he can perform an action during the round. The pilot can do so
too, but operating a weapon system
and performing a maneuver in the same phase adds difficulty to the
maneuver check.
One extremely useful tactic in spaceship combat involves holding your action. If the weapons officer doesn't have a good shot in the Amazing phase, he can always wait until the Good, Ordinary, or Marginal phase to see if a better shot develops. Sometimes a spaceship might be in a great position early in the round--but if no one on board has an action available, no shot takes place. Such is the stress and uncertainty of combat.

Vehicle Operation skill check and then gets any outcome on TABLE G4 other LosING CONTROL OF A SPACESHIP than "Under control," the vehicle en-
ters a major spin (see above).
Yaw: The vehicle slides at an angle to the right or left while continuing to maintain forward momentum. Roll d6 to determine which side the vehicle slides toward: 1-3 = right, 46 =leit
The yaw continues until the pilot's next available action, at which time he can end the yaw immediately by using that action (no skill check is required) to bring his vessel under control. Alternatively, he can attempt Vehicle Operation-space vehicle check with a +1 penalty (in addition to other penalties that may apply). If this check succeeds, he ends the yaw and is able to perform a Routine maneuver in the same phase. If this check fails, the spaceship enters spin.
Under control: The helmsman either experiences no trouble and con-
160tinues on his way, or manages to get an out-of-control vessel back on

Attack Skills
The rules for attacking with a spaceship weapon system are much like those for attacking with a personal weapon. The target may have a resistance moditier, reflecting how hard it is to hit; it may be at short, medium, or long range; it may have some kind of cover. The skill used by the attacking character is System Operation-weapons. These powered weapons systems are typically in-
tended for control by someone other
than the helmsman. For example, the weapons officer controls the weapons while the sensors officer operates radar and detectors.
Defense Skills
Spaceship defenses operate differently from the simple defense mechanisms of personnel and vehicles such as armor. Armor and ablative shields are passive defenses. No skill check is required to operate passive systems under normal circumstances.
Active defense systems, on the other hand, require direct guidance from an operator. Chaff, point-defense guns, deflection inducers, and displacers are active defenses. Gen-
erally, the operator of a defense sys-
tem holds his action until an attack is declared against his ship, where-

upon the operator makes a skill check to determine his success. The effects of the check are given in each individual defense system description earlier in this chapter.
The skill used by the defending character is System Operation-defenses. These powered defense systems are typically intended for control by someone other than the helmsman. For example, the defenses officer controls the defenses while
the sensors officer operates radar
and detectors,
Sensor Skills
Sensors perform critical roles in any space combat. The first part of any engagement is detection of the enemy (see "Detection Evasion, and Pursuit," above). In addition to locating the enemy, the sensors officer acts as an important member of the combat team. The primary function of the sensors officer in combat is to analyze the enemy ship with a successful System Operation-sensors skill check, identitying the function of each of the enemy ship's compartments
There are two ways in which sensors can assist an attack. By spend-

=

=ttt

==t

=

=

T

T

=

T

WWWNN

=== ===

WUN D

DWW

T

NN

WU

ARTERE

DD

Y

R

=, ==
CORRANNOONUNADWWN

to ships or other distant locations, and code them if desired. The result of a System Operation-communications skill check may provide a modiier to decoding attempts made by others: Critical Failure, -2 bonus; Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, +1 penalty; Good, +2 penalty; Amazing,
+3 penalty.
In a ship equipped with a jammer, a defense system, a comm officer can spend an action jamming enemy transmissions. The result of her skill check applies to the opponent's com`munications skill checks in the next round.
In addition, the comm officer can spend an action using a jammer to apply the above modifiers to the sensors checks of an enemy vessel in the the next round.

WL

NS

CLORANNONNNDADUWWA

Command Skills

W

The commanding officer aboard a

vessel can use Tactics-space tactics

WY

to apply pendlties to the enemy and

W

Leadership-command to apply

bonuses to officers under his charge.

VR

WU

BRDPPPPPWWWWWNIN

NOAONANUNUNND NNNNNOOOONUNUAPDODDWAWNANNNOOANNNCDOOONREANNNONANND

[LELRTRTITNT

When a ship

, roll d20 and refer ta the calumn for

number of compartments. The number in that column is

the number of the compartment that was

See the skill descriptions in Chapter 4 Skills in the Player's Handbook.
Also, the commander can spend an action analyzing enemy move-
`ment and providing warning. The re-
sult of a Tactics-space tactics skill

ing an action, the sensors operator can improve the odds of a successful hit. The sensors opexator's skill check may provide a modifier to the weapons operator in the next available phase. Critical Failure, +2 penalty; Failure, no modifier; Ordinary -1 bonus; Good, -2 bonus; Amazing,

uses his sensors skill to target the laser. Kalin gets a Good success, and then a 5 is rolled to determine which compartment of the enemy ship is hit. Kalin's player can look at TABLE and G50: CompARTMENT Hir LOCATION change the d20 result to any number from 3107,

check may provide a modifier to the next action checks made by the rest of the ship's crew: Critical Failure, +2 penalty for all other crew members; Failure, no modifier; Ordinary -1 bonus for one other crew member; Good, -1 bonus for all other crew members; Amazing, -2 bonus for all

-3bonus. Second, the sensors operator can
spend an action attempting to target aspecific compartment of an enemy
vessel. To do this, the sensors opera-
tor must have an action in the same
phase in which a successful shot is fired. If the weapons officer generates a hit, the sensors operator then rolls a System Operation-sensors check. The result allows the sensor operator o adjust the random hit determination of compartments (see "Damage," below): Critical Failure,
weapon shot misses target complete-
ly; Failure, no modifier; Ordinary, adjust d20 compartment roll by 1; Good, adjust roll by 2 Amazing, adjust roll by +3.
˘ Example: Immediately following a successful skill check by the weapons officer, Kalin Starborne

Sensors operators can also spend other crew members.

an action to assist the defenses oper-

ator in protecting the ship, providing amodifier for the rest of the current round and all of the next round. Skill check resul penalty; Failure, no modifier; Ordi-

Damage All spaceships have Amazing toughness. The damage from weapons of Good toughness--which includes

nary -1 bonus; Good, -2 bonus;
Amazing, -3 bonus.
Onboard sensor systems rely on the System Operation-sensors skill.

most heavy and vehicular weapons--automatically degrades; mortal damage becomes wound damage, wound damage becomes stun dam-

Usually, a sensors officer operates this equipment.

age, and stun damage is ignored The damage done by weapons of Ordinary firepower--which includes

Communication

most personal weapons--degrades twice; mortal damage becomes stun

Skills

damage, and wound and stun dam-

The primary function of the communications officer is sending and re-
ceiving messages. During combat,
the comm officer can send messages

age are ignored. For example, a hero who fires a 9mm pistol at a ship must score an Amazing hit (which inflicts mortal damage but is degraded to stun damage) in order to affect the

----
P
SPACESHIPS

The reason that hit locations are set up in an asymmetrical fashion is to reflect the fact that some compartments of the ship are hidden deep in its structure, making them harder to hit than other compartments. Most ship designers place the least vital systems in the ship's outermost com: partments, expecting a captain would rather lose a cargo hold to enemy fire than his power plant or command deck

Compartment Damage
A compartment's mortal rating is the same as its number of durability points, and its stun and wound ratings are twice that number.

Stun Damage

When a compartment takes stun damage equal to more than half of

its stun rating, the use of any system

housed in that compartment suffers

a+1 penalty. When a compartment loses all of its stun points, additional

stun damage converts to wound

damage at the rate of | wound for

every 2 points of stun damage. In addition o the +1 penalty, a
compartment that loses more than

half of its stun points may suffer a

system failure. A durability check must be made for the compartment `The ship's skill score for this check is

equal to its original stun rating

(twice its durability). 1f the compartment fails its dura-

bility check. one system in the com-

partment (roll randomly to determine which) ceases to function. Onsite re-

pairs using Technical Science-jury-

rig or remote repairs using System

ship. Any armor the spaceship has may reduce or negate that damage.
For purposes of assessing damage, spaceships share many characteristics with characters and

Operation-engineering may allow the system to be temporarily restored for a number of rounds, as described under the Technical Science-juryrig skill description in Chapter 4: Skills in the Player's Handbook. Eventually,

vehicles. Spaceship compartments
have stun, wound, and mortal rat-

permanent repairs will be necessary.

ings; wound or mortal damage in- Wound Damage

flicted by enemy weapons also causes secondary damage; and @ spaceship's armor may stop some or all of the primary damage of a hit
Whenever a ship is struck by weapons fire, a random compartment is damaged. Successful use of

For every 2 points of wound damage suffered, a compartment also suffers 1 point of secondary stun damage. Secondary damage is calculated before armor absorbs primary damage. Armor has no effect on secondary damage.

162sensor systems may modify (see "Sensor Skills," above). TasLE GS0: COMPARTMENT HiT

this roll

When a compartment

Refer to wound LOCATIOhNal.l of

damage equal to its wound rating,

takes more than the use of

any system housed in that compartment suffers a +1 penalty. When a compartment loses all of its wound points, additional wound damage converts to mortal damage at the xate of 1 mortal for every 2 points of wound damage.
In addition to the +1 penalty, a compartment that loses more than hall of its wound points may suffer a system failure. A durability check must be made for the compartment `The ship's skill score for this check is equal to its original wound rating (twice its durability).
1 the compartment fails its durability check, one system in the com-
partment (xoll randomly to determine
which) ceases to function. Onsite repairs using Technical Science-jury1ig or remote repairs using System Operation-engineering may allow the system to be temporarily restored for a number of rounds, as described under the Technical Science-juryrig skill description in Chapter 4: Skills
in the Player's Handbook. Eventually, permanent repairs will be necessary.
Mortal Damage
For every 2 points of mortal damage suffered, a compartment also suffers 1 point of secondary stun damage and | point of secondary wound damage. Secondary damage is calculated before armor absorbs primary damage. Armor has no effect on secondary damage
Each point of mortal damage inlicted on a compartment imposes a +1 pendlty to any systems contained within the compartment. All penalties caused by stun, wound, and mor tal damage are cumulative.
Each time a compartment suffers mortal damage, a durability check must be made for the compartment. `The ship's skill score for this check is equal to its original wound point total (twice its durability). Apply a +1 penalty for every point of mortal damage that the compartment has suffered, as well as penalties for excessive stun and wound damage.
1 the compartment fails its durability check, all systems within the compartment cease functioning until repairs are made. Technical Sci ence-juryrig may allow for the compartment to be temporarily restored for @ number of rounds, as described under the skill description in Chap ter 4: Skills in the Player's Handbook
If the compartment fails its durability check with a Critical Failure,

ifs destroyed, and d4 other compart- gineer is to direct and assist in the ments sustain 2d4w each due to de- completion of repairs. The engineer

compression, power fluctuations, and fire. Armor offers no protection against internal damage.
When a compartment is complete-

can spend an action to attempt repairs of a minor nature in any com-
partment while remaining at his station (which may be in either a

Iy wrecked (all mortal points gone), it `command or engineering compart-

ceases to exist on the ship record

ment). A remote repair can reduce

form, and all damage that strikes that location automatically is ap-

stun damage caused directly by
enemy damage or by the secondary

plied to the next lower-numbered eifects of heavier wound or mortal

compartment, If necessary, wrap

damage. A remote repair can also re-

around to the highest-numbered activate a system rendered inopera-

compartment if the lowest is destroyed,
# Example: Compartment 2 of a

tive due to excessive stun damage. The engineer's System Opera-
tion-engineering skill check result

trader-class vessel is destroyed by

determines the amount of stun dam-

enemy fire. The next hit on that com- age repaired: Critical Failure, com-

partment is automatically applied to partment suffers d4 points of stun

compartment 1. If compartment 1 is

damage; Failure, no stun points re-

destroyed, the next hit on that com- paired; Ordinary, | stun point re-

partment is applied to compartment paired; Good, 2 stun points repaired;

6.the ship's highest-numbered compartment.

Amazing, 3 stun points repaired. `When using a remote repair to
temporarily fix an inoperative sys-

Damage to
Passengers and Crew

tem, use the rules in the Technical Science-juryrig skill description; the

When a compartment suffers dam-

system can be temporarily restored.

age, individuals inside may suffer damage. First, armor is accounted

Once such an attempt is made, the engineering officer can't attempt an-

for and the primary damage suffered
by the compartment is calculated.

other remote repair in the target
compartment until it suffers addi-

Any individual inside then suffers the same damage, reduced one grade. If the individual is wearing

tional damage. Finally, the engineering officer
can spend an action to assist a dam-

armor, it may be taken into account. age control officer in any compart-

Damage sutfered by passengers and ment. The result of a System

crew is low impact (LI).
# Example: Wallace is working

Operation-engineering skill check `may provide a modifier to the dam-

within a compartment when it is hit age control officer's next repair at-

{or 8 points of wound damage. The
compartment's armor absorbs 5
wounds, leaving it with 3 points of wound damage. Wallace, who is

tempt: Critical Failure, +2 penalty;
Failure, no modifier; Ordinary -1 0od, -2 bonus; Amazing, -3

wearing no armor, takes 3 points of

Damage Control stun damage.

Characters in compartments that are completely destroyed (all mortal

Skills

points gone) may suffer the effects of The damage control officer must

decompression. See "Environments" rush to a damaged compartment to

inChapter 3 Gamemasters in Action. affect rgpairs. It's necessary to work

Engineering Skflls

in the damaged compartment to repair wound or mortal damage, and to attempt the restoration of a system that ceased operating due to a failed

The most basic function of the engi- durability check or a compartment neering officer in combat is the prop- that ceased operating due to mortal er direction of power resources. With damage.

an action, the engineering officer

Immediate repairs, such as those

can freely allocate the ship's power factors to its various systems: engines, weapons, defenses, and

`made during combat, require the use of Technical Science-juryrig. Skill check result: Critical Failure, the

sensors. -

system or compartment becomes un-

The secondary furiction of the en- usable until full repairs are made;

Failure, the juryrig attempt doesn't

» work but can be tried again later; Or-
dinary, the system or compartment

--jr_m--ry

becomes operational for d6+1

rounds; Good, becomes operational for 2d4+1 rounds; Amazing, becomes

operational for 3d4+1 rounds. Unfortunately, juryrigging has the

side effect of causing trouble during full repairs. During the complex skill

check for a full repair, additional successes are required depending

jury- SdIHS126dS
on the success rolled during

rigging. An Ordinary juryrigging re-

sult requires 3 additional successes; a Good result requires 2 additional

successes; and an Amazing result re-

quires only | additional success.

Full repairs require the use of the Technical Science-repair skill and a

complex skill check. The complexity

of the skill check is determined by

the amount of damage sustained. A damage control officer can only re-

pair one compartment at a time.

Repairing stun damage is a task

of Ordinary complexity, requiring a

total of 3 successes. Repair attempts

to build up these successes can be made once per round of work. Once

the complex skill check is complete,

all stun damage to the compartment

is removed.
Repairing wound damage is a task of Good complexity, requiring a total of 4 successes. If the compartment has suffered damage equal to or less than half of its wound rating,
repair attempts to build up these
successes can be made once per
minute of work. If the compartment
has lost more than half of its wound points, repair attempts to build up these successes can be made once per hour of work. Once the complex skill check is complete, all wound
damage to the compartment is.
removed.
Repairing mortal damage is «
task of Amazing complexity, requiring B successes plus | additional
success for every point of mortal
damage. Attempts to repair mortal
damage can be made once per day of work. Once the complex skill check is complete, all mortal dam-
age to the compartment is removed.
When all of a compartment's damage has been fully repaired, its systems are fully repaired also.
Compartments that have lost all of their mortal boxes can't be repaired; the compartment and all of
163 its systems must be replaced. See
"Adding New Systems" on page 155.

Mysterious and unique, artifacts are devices that human science
cannot fully explain or duplicate.
`While alien artifacts may give
the heroes special abilities or
hamper them in unusual ways, they give you a number of story
vehicles and plots to weave
adventures around. Where did
the artifact come from? Who wants it, and why? And what
miracles might the hero
perform with the artifact? Artifacts are created by means
beyond human ken, While this often implies a star-spanning
civilization that preceded humanity--or one that watches over it today--it's quite possible for a highly advanced civilization
to neverleave its own planet. .. and when humans arrive to
explore the ruins, there's no
telling what they might find. Alien artifacts might drop in on
perfectly normal people unexpectedly, or they may be the goal of extensive quests taken on
by the greatestof heroes.

. ARTIFACT

ARTIFACT and acquires a device that can easi-
Iy be sold or thrown away.

ACQUISITION

DESIGN At your discretion, a hero might
"cash in* his alien artifact at some

Artifacts appear thiough one of two point. The hero could buy off the

The process of creating an alien arti-

different ways. Either a hero begins flaw, severing the connection to the fact consists of four steps:

play with an antifact by selecting the device. It also might fit the story for

Alien Artifact perk-or flaw, or the he- the hero to turn in « perk for an equal

1. Form

foes uncover an alien artifuct during their adventures.

number of skill points--maybe the
hero submits his invention to the re-

2. Purpose 3. Powers

search institutefor study.

4. Drawbacks

Perks and Flaws

the Story When aplayer selects Alien Artiiact Artifacts

in

5 & perk or flaw, you need to do a bit

This should be a creative process, so let your imagination run wild. The design considerations discussed

165 dpfvhpvitpiyeatotiahstdcbfaafthihhtiafohioooienldnemaeluoteececlryisamrmwuwrovstsoirSStreeeoekoyioanriiiiue,cfthsheop,ie,gsnufrehtantintlar.cdecoertsngstywhrdoktcaiceestthforraukhfoIeiurtnfmeeoosrhimeanntsicbrltertuhnreeps'seheoiacoogdhsecentdrpnevpasgdpmetetrh,ahsutrgespstroeaeedereeprepsoaanpyyappmeirilnnvaicl,ngrtvoreiraoeesfoittacdieahagtae--afrunpheencccuirttadocifintescnfnde.iiatehecr'einutoaaailtioAcsdrriceeweuflsobdcllscpFerlipaeirstollluhoentroifeitbecscr;enatideiraspawgnoehntrratnsaifoettitvoyehsscvaagchheotrechsltvitfe,tasreiiorhso.qkieesoAioedbqpstutacr«aoyuiitetnetpooAuctoilpenorppkhedsodomiilsestrhneroern.lnftervisueaalmsaidcuptpsr.itaoioaei'Gchdytyhmarodhltrosw.niiwncla'nNiatcoeteosneeevisndittooc,uhnrnrcastsoonutetktworhitmafset.reten.kreietsftsslaehvlsoneoaornAahiasbrusaisbAeerbgzitdmtlbti.lbeeno--wrhafnselloooardieti.opeoitdfaitneottusuoeh-et-turriseeenst-ofeivts-rne- naHv1awbcYtctrdttta1sorttttiohheheuohhahiuerinopieroosrhetmeeceueloipoerenmmeiueengrnreae1Ynfuyeauedossachcihaststedevrs.'goflvsieyftrohceetsdin,nhioeuefiesicrpodotnurraWivotnoneooomriusIuarrgrryefaihmrtoelaiohes,rdrrwsheeonlpsetsceishtoi,taWophudetnwuphetoritoin,sufutaenreytengoroeresdachhetlahnrdphtfwtowwedushiasitcycreteeaednommaise-runaetaodieowynosrstnhesselfndrntomornsthouslontee,c'ehrtstyvtioaechueem,soenatpo,pnesrwuopcehlleprsycgoaayptlnepnlraramairhafeiiaaoda,nltetot'timgyyedeaursmcwumlyhqdtsosintvt--aai,orearoiautiserneaaoa.aigvlefinurjeuepnrinsoa,rnrsokanenbbesd,euhttdrcgTnynarfaibiiinainontifffrnamytyt'hiusnipaitiaae,lhuunoapmtmcgeiteniccetilaooisblldaulihosutflnidttddfaunralarunsyitneteepegnyrogedatrewdilc.intadb.'cetil.relttnaeenteefetbiiSooseo.oosfhcicaccfbodfnx-e.envrmdianaaiacoiIoefedn-eandetcty---tu-briecselet;n-n--desg-

below are guidelines. As always, you should feel free to modify and adapt the rules o your campaign as you see fit
Form Its up to you to decide whether to first select the artifact's shape and appearance, or whether you want to
decide its general purpose before anything else. Does form follow func-
tion, or vice versa?
Alist of several possible forms
can be found on TABLE GS1: ALIEN AR-
mieAcT FonM (on the following page). Choose one that strikes your interest, or roll the dice and allow chance to decide.
In addition to selecting a physical form, you should consider the characteristics and properties of the artifact, What does it look like, feel like, smell like? Is it simple or complex, rough or smooth, sturdy or delicate, symmetrical or crooked? Does it react normally to various stimuli-- getting warm when heated, for example? Or does it dely classifica
tion? Details make an alien artifact

memorable, and sometimes a little irightening for the heroes.
The physical forms listed on Table GS1 are explained below.
Appliance or Machine
The artifact is a substantial mechan-
ical or electronic device, ranging in size from a microwave oven to a steam turbine filling a large room. It's designed to be installed and turned on, instead of being carried
like a flashlight or a sidearm. A hero
with an artifact of this size needs to find a place to keep it. Leaving it at the team headquarters or in the ship is a good option. An artillery-sized weapon, resurrection machine, computer, shield generator, or longrange communicator might fall into this category.

Carried Device
The artifact assumes the form of @ small device easily carried by a single person; it may or may not be especially concealable. Most personal weapons and special tools fall into this category.

Clothing

or

Worn Device

The artifact can be worn like an article of clothing or jewelry. Its up to

you whether the artifact can mas-
querade as an unremarkable gar-

ment or is easily identitied as something special. Defensive de-

vices are usually of this type.

Graft or Implant
Much like a piece of cybernetic equipment, the alien artifact has
been installed within the hero's
body. If it replaces a limb or covers the body's surface, it may be quite noticeable; deeper implants are usually undetectable by the naked eye. The device may mimic, replace, or improve the biclogical systems and organs within the hero's body, or it could be a module that doesn't interfere with the hero's normal biologi cal functions.
Heroes with alien implants might be subjects of experimentation, unwilling agents or emissaries of the alien power, or even special agents given access to unusual technology. Some implants may not be conventional technological devices: a symbiotic organism living in the hero's bloodstream falls into this category.

TABLE G51: ALIEN ARTIFACT Form

d20

Form

1-3

Appliance or Machine

a-9

Carried device--roll d20:

1-2

Baton

Book

Disk
Case/kit

Instrument

Pack

Pistol

Rifle

Shield

Sphere

Staff

Sword

Tool, small

Tool, medium

Tool, large

10-14

Clothing/Wern device--roll d20:

1-2

Amulet

Armar

Bracelet
Cloak/cape Footwear/boots

Handwear/glove Harness/belt

Headgear/helmet Jacket/coat Jumpsuit Ring Graft or Implant--roll d20:
Right arm Left arm Right leg Left leg

Torso

Head

Full body, skeletal

Full body, muscular

Full body, vascular

Full body, nervous

Procedure or Treatment Site or Installation--roll d20:

1-10

Well known

1-20

Not well known

Vehicle--roll d20:

10

Ground vehicle

1115

Water vehicle

16-18

Air vehicle

19-20

Space vehicle

Procedure

ar

Treatment

Subjected to a special procedure, the hero has been altered by alien tech-

nology. This could have been a men-

tal training regimen, where the hero

learned how to use his mind to the

greatest effect. Or it might have involved exposure to mutagenic

processes, augmentation of the

hero's physiology, or anything else

you can think of. The hero might not even be aware of who changed

him--or why.

Site or Installation
The artifact is a special facility that cannot be removed from its current location. It might be a widely known monument or mystery that the hero solved or investigated secretly, or it could be an undiscovered place that the hero stumbled upon. Perhaps the installation has worked some kind of transformation on the hero, o it might provide a special and unique tesource that only the hero can use.
An immobile site might demand
the hero's periodic return in order to retain any benefits he gains from it. For instance, once every year the hero might have to recharge his cosmic energy by bathing in the iridescent splendor of the Crystal Shrine of Ridan. It's also possible that the arti
{act may be able to monitor the hero
from afar, communicating telepathically and instantaneously, no matter how lar away the hero is.

Vehicle The artifact is too large to carry, but
atleast it can move itself around. It may be a vehicle capable of actual motion--a car, plane, or flying saucer; or it might be a vehicle of a ditferent type--a teleportation pad
or a time machine. Perhaps it isn't re-
ally a transportation device at all, and any abilities it possesses for movement might be secondary o its true function. For example, a carsized alien computer that follows the hero around matches this definition

Purpaose
Ithumanity is any model, alien civilizations are likely to fill the galaxy with useless junk: disco records, styTofoam cups, garlic presses, or ceramic alligators. Fortunately. we're not interested in artifacts like these. They may be worth money to the collectors of such trivia, but they don't

Primary @20) 1-2

Secondary d20)

Purpose Communication Control Defense Environment Information Medical Mental enhancement Offense Physical enhancement
Transmutation
Transportation
None

do anything. In your campaign, an

ity induction engines, or stardrives.

alien artifact should have significant It might even allow control over cer-

and powerful capabilities. The first tain types of life forms.

step in identifying these capabilities

is determining the artifact's purpose. Defense

Table G52 lists possible purposes The device is intended to protect its

for an artifact. Roll once for a prima- user from harm. Force screens, kinet-

1y purpose and once for a secondary ic dampening fields, displacement

purpose, or select a combination of

shields, physical armors, and other

purposes that seems appropriate.

similar devices may surround and

While artifacts may have a variety of shield the artifact's owner.

powers and drawbacks, most of

these are tied to its primary purpose. Environment

# Example: Jennifer is rolling up a The artifact manipulates the sur-

random artifact. She starts with TAZLErounding environment--purifying

rolls G51: Auien ARTIEACT FoRM, and

the air, extinguishing fires on com-

15; the hero in question has an alien `mand, controlling the temperature in

graft or implant. She then rolls a 20; the vicinity, and so on.

the implant is a full-body nervous

system grait. Jennifer goes on to

Information

see TABLE GS2: ARTIFACT PURPOSE to

The purpose of the device is to gath-

what it does. Rolling for primary pur- er information or increase the user's

pose, she comes up with an 18. The ability to do so. For example, the de-

device is designed o transmute ma- vice might provide the user with

terials in some fashion. For the sec- clairsentience, drastically improve

ondary purpose, Jennifer rolls an

his vision or hearing, or act as a

it's meant to be used as a weapon. database.

Communication

Medical

The device has unusual capability The artifact's primary purpose is to

for communication. The communica- heal injured creatures. The artifact

tion may take any form, such as

possesses the ability to scan life

telepathy, instantaneous radio, em- forms and restore tissue to its un-

pathy, or universal translation.

damaged state. Most medical arti-

facts function on any species.

Control

The artifact is designed to control a Mental Enhancement

specific site or system, providing the
hero with access to that ared's assets. Optionally, the artifact may exert some kind of unusual com-
`mand or control over a certain type
of machine, such as computers, grav-

The artifact serves to enhance the

user's mental abilities. Typically, this

results in a modification to the char-

acter's Ability Scores, resistance

modifiers, or skills.

167

Offense
The device is a weapon of a level and power that exceeds the capabilities of the current Progress Level. As another option, the artifact with an offensive purpose can act indirectly, improving the hero's own perfor-
mance in combat.
Physical Enhancement
The device augments the hero's physical capabilities. It might be an improvement of the musculature or
skeleton, or a metabolic supercharg-
er that makes the hero a dynamo when forced into a fight
Transmutation The purpose i to change one material, item, or form of energy into something else. For example, one alien

Powers &

Analysis The artifact provides.a detailed

DRAWBACKS

analysis of any object or area

Although all alien artifacts are rare and wonderful devices, their exact abilities must be defined for game purposes. Powers are described as Ordinary, Good, or Amazing. Drawbacks are described as Slight, Moderate, and Extreme. When a hero selects an alien arlifact as perk, the result is typically an artifact with Good or Amazing powers balanced by Slight or Moderate drawbacks. A flaw artifact displays Ordinary powers that must be paid for with Moderate or Extreme drawbacks. Naturally, when you design an artifact for the heroes, it can have as many powers or drawbacks as you like.

scanned. Generally, the analysis power has a range of 20 meters and
can atfect one target at a time, or an
area 6 meters in diameter. A detailed analysis of an object or situation provides @ -3 bonus to any Science or Investigate skill checks based on the
information.
Ordinary: Al energy forms and relationships are analyzed with complete accuracy.
Good: Energy and inanimate mat ter or compounds are analyzed with complete accuracy.
Amazing: Energy, inanimate mat-
ter, and living organisms are analyzed with complete accuracy.

artifact might use ambient energy to

Anti-life Ray

build or reorganize matter, and another may instantly reduce tall pine trees into sawed planks.
Transportation The artifact is designed to convey its user in some manner. To the denizens at the current Progress Level, the transportation that the artifact provides may seem miraculous.

Powers
Ater you've determined the primary
«and secondary purposes of the de-
vice and the number of its powers and drawbacks, you're ready to determine its powers. You can either choose powers that seem appropriate to you, or you can let the dice fall where they may on Table G55

The device emits a beam of energy that disrupts bioelectric energy. The weapon is fired using the Modern Ranged Weapons skill. Select a specialty skill (pistol, rifle, or SMG) appropriate to the device's form. Ona hit, the beam does déw/2d4w/3ddw of energy (En) damage at Ordinary firepower, depending on the degree of success achieved. Armor is useless against an anti-life ray.

TaBLE G53: ALIEN ARTIFACT AS PERK

Ordinary: Beam affects a single target out to a range of 20 meters; it

`may fire once per day.

Primary Secondary Powers Powers

Drawbacks

Good: Beam affects all targets ina path | meter wide and 40 meters long, and may be fired three times

per day.

Amazing: Beam alfects all targets

in @ path 2 meters wide and 60 me-

ters long, and may be fired six times per day.

TABLE G54: ALIEN ARTIFACT As FLaw

Primary Secondary

Powers

Powers

Drawbacks

=G

168

ONOUAWN

N-N-N-N-N-]

Armor
The device can either be worn as armor, or serve to tougher: the wear-
er's body against attack. If combined
with another form of armor, only the more effective armor is considered.
Ordinary: The armor absorbs d6+1 hits against any attack.
Good: The armor absorbs 2d4 hits against any attack and provides Good toughness.
Amazing: The armor absorbs 2d4+1 hits against any attack and provides Amazing toughness.
Carrier Wave The artifact converts itself and its
wearer or user into an energy form
that is capable of rapid travel. You

Communication (d4)
1 Cyberconscious 2 Empathy
3 Star transceiver
4 Telepathy

Information (d4)
1 Analysis
2 Omnidata computer
3 Precognition 4 Postcognition

Contraol (d4)
1 Cybercontrol
2 Dark matter control 3 Kinetic cantrol
4 Probability control

Medical [(d4)
1 Healing touch
2 Immaortality 3 Regenerator 4 Resuscitator

Defense (d4)
1 Armor
2 Displacement
3 Energy dispersal 4 Kinetic dispersal

Mental Enhancement (d4) 1 Heightened Intelligence 2 Heightened Personality

3 Heightened

Will

4 Multitasking

Environmental (d4) 1 Magnetic control 2 Molecular manipulation 3 Photonic manipulation 4 Stealth field

Offense (d4) 1 Antilife ray 2 Dark matter attack 3 Disintegration field 4 Gravity generation

Physical Enhancement (d4) 1 Heightened Constitution 2 Heightened Dexterity 3 Heightened Strength 4 Hyper adaptation

Transmutation (d4) 1 Elemental conversion 2 Molecular transformation
3 ODxidation/reduction
4 Virtual matter creation

Transportation

[(d4)

1 Carrier wave

2 Dimensional shift

3 Time travel

4 Teleportation

can choose exactly what form of en ergy the artifact uses. An electrical carrier wave allows movement along wires. Light or radiation carrier waves permit lineofsight move ment through the air. Sound or seis mic carrier waves travel through water and solid objects. Psionic car rier waves may allow movement in all mediums, but may be detected by Mindwalkers
If the hero encounters something that interferes with the carrier wave--such as a short in a wire, smoke, or radiation shielding--the hero materializes at that point or re turns to his departure point, at your choice. Travel speed depends on the medium of the wave. Visible light and radio waves travel at the speed of light--about 300,000 kilometers
per second.
Ordinary: The artifact can induce the carrier wave once per day for up to | minute.
Good: The artifact can induce the carrier wave four times per day for up to 10 minutes at a time.
Amazing: The artifact can induce the carrier wave once every 2 hours
for up to 15 minutes at a time.

Cyberconscious
The artifact functions as a gridcast er, allowing the hero to project his consciousness into computers, net works, and computerized machinery. He can download or install programs and information by use of the Knowl edgecomputer operation skill.
Ordinary: The artifact confers a 2
bonus and must be in contact with the target computer.
Good: The range increases to 500 meters, and the bonus to 3 steps.
Amazing: The range increases to 50 kilometers with a 4 step bonus.
Cybercantrol
The hero can exert control over any computér or computerized machin ery, causing it to respond at will. Se curity doors open, automated machinery starts or stops operation, and vehicles with robotic or comput er controls move as directed. The exact degree of control is determined by the hero's Knowledgecomputer
operation skill check: On an Ordinary success, the de
vice's operation is interrupted or in terfered with, providing a +2 penalty
to its operation or causing a tempo rary failure.

On a Good success, the device is controlled for as long as the hero maintains his concentration, acting in whatever manner he dictates.
On an Amazing success, the arti fact functions as above, but the hero can issue commands for specific op erations that remain in place until someone repairs the device.
Cybercontrol can be used at will, whenever the hero spends an action to do so. The hero must be able to see the device he intends to control.
Ordinary: The device provides a 2 bonus to appropriate skill checks and has a range of 10 meters.
Good: The bonus is 3 steps, and the range is 100 meters.
Amazing: The artifact confers a 4 bonus, with a range of 1 kilometer.
Dark Matter Attack
Once per hour, the hero can con
dense streams of dark matter into normal space and form them into bolts or blades. Attacks are made using a Modern Ranged Weapons
skill check. Select a specialty skill
(pistol, rifle, or SMG) appropriate to the device's form. Effects vary with the power of the artifact:
Ordinary: The attack inflicts

169

--[t

ignores all physical barriers. Effectively, this allows transit through

50 meters and can affect 100 kg or 10,000 cubic meters of gas. The

p

walls by shifting, taking a step, and
emerging again. It is impossible to

change lasts for 6 hours. Amazing: The artifact has a range

see or atfect the real world while

of 200 meters and affects either 1,000

shifted. If the shifted character at-

kg or 100,000 cubic meters of gas. The

tempts to emerge in a solid object,

change lasts for 1 day.

she reappears next to the object and

suffers 2d6 points of stun damage. Empathy

Ordinary: The hero can shilt her- The artifact extends the user's per-

ARTIEACTS

self and anything carried, for a maximum of 1 hour per day.

ception 1o allow him to sense the emotional states of others. This

Good: The hero can shift herself power resembles the ESP-empathy

and up to six additional characters skill available to Mindwalkers (see

ALIEN

(or 1,000 kg) for up to 4 hours per day. Chapter 14: Psionics in the Player's

2d4s/2d4w/dBm of En/G damage and `has a range of 100 meters.
Good: The attack inflicts 3d4s/3d4w/2d4m of En/G damage and has a range of 200 meters.
Amazing: The attack inflicts 3d4s/3d4w/2d4m of En/A damage and has a range of 500 meters.

Amazing: The hero can shift up to 20 characters or a mass of 20 metric tons (such as @ small spaceship) for up to 12 hours per day.
Disintegration Field
The artifact causes matter in the af-
fected area to break down into its component particles. Attacks are made using @ Modern Ranged Weap-

Handbook). The user doesn't expend
psionic energy points.
Ordinary: The artifact's owner may use the power once per day, as if using the broad skill ESP.
Good: The user may make use of this power once per hour, as if using the specialty skill empathy at rank |
Amazing: The hero may use the power once per hour, as if using the

Dark Matter Contral The artifact creates a zone of influ-
ence in which dark matter reactions
are either rendered impossible or violently destabilized. If the hero chooses to shut down dark matter reactions, all mass reactors in the area of effect cease to function. Any system powered by the mass reactor ceases operation.

ons skill check. Select a specialty skill (pistol, rifle, or SMG) appropriate to the device's form. The field in-
dlicts d4m/d6m/d8m of energy (En) damage with Good firepower. Neither armor nor defensive devices can deflect this beam. Only one creature
or object can be targeted al a time.
Ordinary: The range is 20 m, and
the power can be used once per day.

specialty skill empathy at rank 6,
Energy Dispersal When the wielder is struck by a weapon that inflicts energy (En) damage, the artifiact negates some or all of the damage. The artifact's absorbent power is taken into account before an armor roll is made.
Ordinary: The device dissipates 4

f the hero chooses to destabilize the reaction, mass reactors in the area of effect overload within d& rounds and explode as mass

Good: The range is 50 m, and the
power can be used every 6 hours.
Amazing: The range is 100 m, and
the power can be used once per hour.

grenades (for small reactors) or as `matter torpedoes (for shipboard `mass reactors). If a mass reactor blows up inside a ship, that compartment takes the damage first, without the benefit of any armor roll.
An alien artifact actively using
the power of dark matter atlack can
be affected by this power. Ordinary: The power is usable
once per day in @ 20-meter radius. Good: The power is usable four
times per day in a S0-meter radius. Amazing: The power is usable up

Displacement
This device bends light, causing the
user to appear 2 to 4 meters from his
actual location. When the artifact is activated, melee attacks and ranged attacks suffer a +2 penalty. Mental attacks are unatfected.
Ordinary: The power is limited to 3 rounds of use per day.
Good: The power is limited o 6 rounds of use per day.
Amazing: The power is limited to 12 rounds of use per day.

points of damage. Twenty points can
be dissipated each day. Good: The artifact negates 6
points of damage. Thirty points can
be dissipated each day. Amazing: The device negates 8
points of damage. Forty points can be dissipated each day.
Gravity Generation
The device generates powerful, di-
rectional gravitic blasts that allow
the hero to smash opponents to the ground, levitate objects through the air, or send enemies screaming into the sky. Another effective attack s to pick up something heavy and dropit on your enemies.

tosix times per day in a | km radius. Elemental Conversion

If used against a living creature, an attack roll using the Modern

Dimensional Shift
The artifact pierces barriers to a par-
allel dimension of insubstantial mist. Distance is compressed by a factor of ten; a hero who uses dimen-

This artifact allows its user to convert one element into another: nitrogen to oxygen, mercury to iodine, or lead to gold. It operates once per day.

Ranged Weapons skill is required. Select a specialty skill (pistol, rifle, or SMG) appropriate to the artifact's {orm. The affected creature or object can be moved in any direction by 10,

sional shift and walks 3 or 4 kilometers emerges to find that 30 or 40
170kilometers have been traveled in the "real" world. The shifted character

Ordinary: The device has a range
of 10 meters and can affect up to 10 kg (or 1,000 cubic meters of gas). The change lasts for 1 hour.
Good: The device has a range of

20, or 30 meters per phase depending on the degree of success.
The gravity generator can be used for up to 12 phases per day.
Ordinary: A device of this power

can affect up to 100 kg at a range of 50 meters.
Good: The artifact can pick up 500 kg at a range of 100 meters.
Amazing: The artifact can manip ulate up to 2,000 kg at a range of 200 meters.
M
The device allows the hero to heal injuries. It resembles Biokinesis heal (see Chapter 14: Psionics in the Player's Handbook), except that the hero can use it on others and doesn't spend psionic energy points.
Ordinary: The hero may use the power once per day as if using the broad skill Biokinesis.
Good: The hero may attempt heal ing once per hour as if using the heal specialty skill at rank 1.
Amazing: The hero may use the power once per hour as if using heal at rank 6.
The artifact provides extra Strength, Constitution, Dexterity, Intelligence, Will, or Personality, increasing the affected score by 1, 2, or 3 points for an Ordinary, Good, or Amazing power, respectively. This is most suitable as a graft, implant, or proce

dure instead of something the hero carries around.
The artifact allows a hero to survive indefinitely in hostile conditions. He is able to breathe and ignore temper ature, gravity, or radiation extremes, but might eventually die of thirst or starvation if he has no supplies.
Ordinary: The device can adapt the hero to any environment that de viates up to two grades from the hero's natural environment on the GRAPH system.
Good: The device can adapt the hero to any environment that devi ates up to four grades for instance, two grades of gravily and two grades of pressure.
Amazing: The artifact enables the hero to survive in any environment that deviates up to eight grades.
The artifact drastically extends a hero's lifespan and renders him re sistant to mortal blows.
Ordinary: The hero's natural life span is five limes the norm. In addi tion, he gains a 2 bonus to any Staminaendurance checks caused by mortal damage.

Good: The hero's lifespan is ten times longer than normal, and he has a 4 bonus to Staminaendur ance checks due to mortal damage
Amazing: The hero's natural life span is effectively unlimited, and the hero automatically succeeds at all Staminaendurance checks cau d by mortal damage. If the Nero runs out of mortal points, he is simply ren dered unconscious, not dead. His life ends only if his physical body is an nihilated. You can decide that a spe cific form of attack such as poisoning by a particular substance, silver weapons, or exposure to a cer tain wavelength of radiation--may also extinguish his life.
The artifact allows its user to impart kinetic energy to or reduce the kinet ic energy of any object within range If she removes energy, the object slows or stops if she adds energy, the target speeds up.
Kinetic control can be used to af fect falling damage, increase the striking power of a thrown weapon or moving object, or counter the dam age of a melee or unarmed attack that strikes the hero.
Ordinary: The hero can add 2

points to or subtract 2 points from the damage of any unarmed, melee, or thrown weapon attack within 20 meters. Or. the artifact may halve or double the speed of an object in motion with @ mass of up to 100 kg. This power can be used up to 3 phases in asingle day.
Good: The hero can add 4 points to
ARTIFALTS or subtract 4 points of damage from impacts and weapon strikes within 40 meters, immobilize an object with amass of up to 100 kg, or halve or double the speed of an object with a mass of up 10 500 kg. The power can
ALIEH
be used up to 6 phases in a day. Amazing: The hero can adjust
damage by up to 6 points, immobilize objects of up to 500 kg, or alter the speed of objects of up to 2,000 kg, The hero may use this power up to 12 `phases per day.
Kinetic Dispersal The device absorbs and dissipates kinetic energy--the energy of physical blows and impacts. Anytime the wielder is struck by a weapon that inlicts low impact (LD ot high impact (HI) damage, some of the damage is negated before the armor roll.
Ordinary: The device dissipates 4 points of damage. Twenty points can be dissipated each day.
Good: The artifact negates 6 points of damage. Thirty points can be dissipated each day.
Amazing: The device negates 8
points of damage. Forty points can
be dissipated each day.
Magnetic Control
The artifact generates intense magnetic fields within the area of effect. Characters attempting to throw or fire metallic weapons in or through the area of effect suffer @ +2 penalty to their attacks. The user can also choose to magnetize particular objects, causing metal objects to stick together. An opposed Strength feat check is required to fight the power of magnetism; the better degree of success wins,
Ordinary: The area of effect is a
10-meter radius, and magnetized objects are held fast with an effective Strength of 14. The artifact can be activated for a fotal of up to 5 rounds (1 `minute) per day.
Good: The artifact's effective
Strength is 16 over a 20-meter radius. The artifact can be aclivated for up
17 to 10 minutes each day. Amazing: The effective Strength is

20, and the magnetism affects a 50meter radius for up to 1 hour each
day.
Molecular Manipulation
The artifact allows control over an object or area's temperature by regulating molecular activity. Effects last as long as the hero continues to concentrate, and the artifact may be used up to three times per day. I this is used as an attack, the hero must score a successful hit using the Modern Ranged Weapons skill. Select a
specialty skill (pistol, rifle, or SMG)
appropriate lo the device's form. Ordinary: The hero can affect ob-
jects of up to 100 kg, or an area 10
melers in diameter, altering the temperature by §° C (9° F). A living creature directly targeted by the artifact suffers d6s/d6+2s/d4w of En/O from
this treatment.
Good: The hero can affect objects of up 10 500 kg, or an area 20 meters in diameter, altering the temperature by 10° C (18° F). A living target suffers dB+2s/d4w/d4+2w of En/O damage.
Amazing: The hero can affect objects weighing up 102,000 kg or an area 30 meters in diameter, changing the temperature by 20° C (36° F). This inflicts d4+2w/2d4+lw/ d4m of En/G damage to a living creature targeted by the effect.
Molecular
Transfaormation The artifact's potency allows for the instantaneous creation and deconstruction of molecular compounds from existing substances. For example, the artifact could break water (H,0) into hydrogen and oxygen, liberate chlorine from salt, change breathable air into nitrous oxide or nitrogen dioxide, or render sulfuric acid (H,S0,) harmless by changing it into benign water, sulfur, and oxygen.
This artifact can generally make
breathable air out of most atmos-
pheres, neutralize acids or change liquids into acids, and make solid objects fragile or inoperable by changing their composition. The
hero makes a Physical Science-- chemistry skill check to see if she achieves the desired effect. Apply pendities according to your assessment of the complexity of the task, if desired. The power operates once per day.

Ordinary: The device has a xange of 10 meters and can affect up to 10
kg or 1,000 cubic meters of gas. Good: The device has a range of
or 50 meters and can affect 100 kg
10,000 cubic meters of gas.
Amazing: The artifact has a range
01 200 meters and affects either 000 kg or 100,000 cubic meters of gas.
Multitasking This artifact normally takes the form of an implant or procedure. Multitasking provides a bonus to @ hero's action check and allows him to do two related things at the same time without penalty, such as firing at an enemy while solving an astrogation problem in his head. The hero s still limited by his physical body; it's impossible to drive, shoot, and fixa broken radio all at the same time.
Ordinary: The hero gets a-1 bonus to action checks and can at-
tempt two related actions (such as
firing two pistols) at the same time
without penalty.
Good: The hero gains a2 bonus
to action checks and can attempt two
unrelated actions (such as firing a pistol and fixing a radio) at the same time without penalty.
Amazing: The hero gains a-3
bonus to action checks and can attempt up to three unrelated actions
at the same time without penalty.
Omnidata Computer
The artifact offers rapid access to a vast storehouse of information. Since this is an alien artifact, the data may be completely beyond human experience--star charts of distant galaxies, plans for building devices of astonishing power, a complete catalog of planets in a certain sector, detailed maps of ruin sites, an index of every known lifeform within 1,000 light-
years, or whatever you want.
This alien data can make for an outstanding set of adventure hooks,
as the heroes try to build the telepor-
tation platform from the artifact's data, find the ruined city from its maps, and o on.
The power level of the artifact describes its chances of holding relevant information on any particular
topic related to its data. Ordinary de-
vices have a effective Knowledge skill score of 12, Good devices have a score of 15, and Amazing devices have a score of 18,

Oxidation
This device causes extreme oxidation reactions in the area of affect, causing objects to oxidize (burn or
rust). Living creatures are not sus-
ceptible to the reaction, but inani`mate objects can be ruined quite quickly. Targeting requires @ Modern Ranged Weapons check by the artifuct's owner. Select a specialty skill (pistol, rifle, or SMG) appropriate to the device's form.
The user must decide 1o trigger the device's field either to corrode `metal or rocklike objects or to ignite flammable materials such as wood, paper, or oil. The device may be triggered three times per day. The artifact inflicts damage equivalent to Good firepower.
Ordinary: The device inilicts dam`age of d4w/2d4w/3d4w against inanimate objects within a radius of 6/4/2 meters, with a 40-meter range.
Good: The damage is increased to d4+1w/ 2d4+2w/dB+2m within a radius of 6/4/2 meters.
Amazing: The range is increased 10200 meters and the area of effect to
128/4 meters.
Photaonic Manipulation `The artifact alters the characteristics of light in the area of effect, creating
fields of darkness or illumination.
For example, a user could set up
zone in which lasers did not function,
surround enemies in impenetrable darkness, or cause objects to change color by reflecting light in a different frequency.
Ordinary: Range is 100 meters with a 10-meter radius area of effect.
Total duration can't exceed 10 minutes per day.
Good: Range is 400 meters with a
20-meter radius of effect. Total dura-
tion can't exceed 30 minutes per day.
Amazing: Range is 1,000 meters
with a 40-meter radius of effect. Total
duration can't exceed 4 hours per day.
Paostcognition By activating this device, the user gains a mental vision of past events. The device may be activated no more than once per day, and allows 1eview of anything she could see within 20 meters of her current position. With an Ordinary power, the hero may see up to 10 days in the past; with « Good power, as far back as a year; and with an Amazing

power, she can see anything that ever happened there.
Precagnition
When activated, the device provides a brief mental vision or flash of something that will happen unless the hero takes definite steps to prevent it. If, based on his vision, the hero alters plans or changes a mode of investigation, the prophecy may
not come true. The hero can't control
what he sees: precognition is a hit-
or-miss affair.
If you think that a development in the story may merit a precognitive
flash, have the hero make an Awareness-intuition check. With an Ordi-
nary success, the hero gets a vague impression of the future circumstances or surroundings that will allow him 1o recognize a dangerous situation or signiticant opportunity
later on; with a Good success, he
gathers specific cues that enable him to take steps to avoid danger or pursue opportunity; on an Amazing check, the hero's precognition presents him with a perfectly accurate sneak preview of the scene.
The power's quality provides a bonus to the hero's skill check: -2, -3, or -4 steps for Ordinary, Good, or Amazing.
Prabability Control The artifact manipulates the laws of chance, conferring incredible luck
upon its user. This translates into a
-1,-2. or -3 bonus (for an Ordinary, Good, or Amazing artifact, respec-
tively) to any actions the hero attempts while the artifact is altering
probability. The device can be acti-
vated once per day, and the effects
last for d6 rounds.
Regenerator The artifact confers astonishing recuperative powers upon the creature touched, repairing stuns, wounds, and mortal injuries at the rate of 1 point per round. The recipient regains 1 point in each damage category for each round of regeneration. `The regenerative capacity of the device is determined by its power's quality; Ordinary regenerators can function for 6 rounds per day. Good devices for 8 rounds per day, and Amazing devices for 12 rounds per day. Lost limbs, paralysis, and other such injuries can be healed, The artifact can't affect dead creatures.

Resuscitator This miraculous device restores life to the dead. When activated, it allows the deceased to attempt a Resolve-mental resolve check lo struggle back to life. On an Ordinary success, the target recovers | mortal point and is considered stable; on a Good success the target recovers all but 1 mortal point and is considered stable: on an Amazing success the target recovers all mortal points and 1 wound point and 1 stun point.
When the resuscitator is applied, 1ol d6 for each mortal point repaired; this is the number of days that the resuscitator is inoperable as it recharges its energies.
The quality of the power affects the target's Resolve skill check. An Ordinary resuscitator gives a -1 bonus to his check, a Good artifact -2, and an Amazing artifact -3,
Star Transceiver
An instantaneous interstellar communicator, the artifact allows realtime conversations over dozens or hundreds of light-years. It's a device that functions through psionic energies, and thus the operator can speak to any person he's ever met. The chance of reaching the exact in-
dividual is based on an Awareness--
intuition skill check by the user; if
the hero fails the skill check, the
`hero can't construct an accurate psionic signature of the target.
Ordinary: The transceiver has a range of 10 light-years and allows up to 1 minute of conversation per day.
Good: Range of 50 light-years, 10 `minutes of conversation per day.
Amazing: Range of 500 light-years, up to 1 hour of conversation per day.
Stealth Field The artifact projects a field that bends electromagnetic energy, rendering objects invisible. Attempting to atiack an invisible hero imposes a +3 penalty. Sound and smell are not affected, and thus the hero might be detected by those means. If the hero moves the field while it active, it becomes visible as heat shimmer (reduce the attack penalty o +2).
Ordinary: The field has a l-meter radius and lasts 5 minutes per day.
Good: The field has a 4-meter radius and lasts 20 minutes per day.
Amazing: The field has a 6-meter radius and can be used up to 2 hours per day.

Telepathy

p--~2

The
and

artifact receive

allows the hero to send
thoughts, communicat-

ing with the power of the mind. This

resembles the Telepathy-contact

specialty skill (see Chapter 14: Psion-

ics in the Players Handbook), except

that the user need not expend any psionic energy points.

Ordinary: The artifact's owner

`may use the power once per day as if
ARTIFACTS
using the broad skill Telepathy.

Good: The user may make use of
this power once per hour, as if using

ALIEN

the specialty skill contact at rank 1.

Amazing: The hero may use the

power once per hour as if using the specialty skill contact at rank 6.

Teleportation
The artifact allows instantanecus transport from one location to another without crossing intervening space. A hero retains her velocity when teleporting; teleporting in the middle of a fall doesn't cause sudden
cessation of velocity. It's a bad idea
for the user to teleport when moving quickly, such as when she is in a ship in orbit. The teleportation device is usable three times per day.
Ordinary: Range is 1,000 meters. The hero can only teleport what she can carry herself.
Good: Range is 10 kilometers. The hero can teleport herself and up to
100 kg of additional mass.
Amazing: Range is 100 kilometers, with up 10 1,000 kg of additional mass.
Time Travel
This power should be viewed more as a story mechanic than a hero's tactical ability. Traveling in time is something heroes can do to advance the plot, not necessarily to defeat a specific enemy or achieve a tangible goal. If you bring this artifact into play, there are some questions you'll have to answer.
> Can the heroes change the past? What happens to their reality if they do?
» Can the heroes use information
gleaned in the future to alter events in the present day? Is the future
fixed, or will the heroes' actions
change the future they visited? P Are the heroes subject to time-
travel paradoxes? Could they delete themselves by killing their own parents, or do the same to major villains
7 in the present? See Chapter 13: Cam-

paign Design for more ideas about campaigns involving time travel.
Ordinary: The device allows travelupto | year into the past or future.
Good: The artifact allows travel
up to 100 years into the past or
future. Amazing: The artifact allows trav-
el to any time period, past or future.
Virtual Matter
Creation The hero can use this device to create temporary simulated matter, shaping structures or devices'as desired. The hero can create a rope of virtual matter to climb out of a pit, hang glider of virtual matter to escape trom a cliff top, or @ sword of virtual matter to attack a foe. As long as the creation doesn't have any mechanical or electronic components, the artifact can produce it.
Ordinary: The maximum mass of any object created is 10 kg, and the duration is no more than 10 minutes per day.
Good: The maximum mass creat-
ed is 100 kg, and it lasts no more than 1 hour.
Amazing: The artifact can create virtual matter objects weighing up to
1,000 kg, and maintain them for as. long as 6 hours.
Drawbacks
Almost all artifacts are flawed. You should be sure that even the most powerful artitacts do not disrupt the fun or balance of your campaign.
Blackouts The artifact may cause its user to lose all of his stun points and go unconscious under certain conditions. Possible conditions include moments of stress, 6 hours after the artifact is used, or anytime a Critical Failure is rolled on a skill check.
Slight: The condition is unusual, occurring once per two or three adventures.
Moderate: The condition occurs about once every adventure.
Extreme: The condition is guaranteed to strike several times in the
course of an adventure,
Compulsory Behavior The artifact compels unusual behav-
ior from the hero. He might be forced to return to a specific site from time to time, forbidden from eating meat or carrying weapons, repulsed by

certain situations or characters, or
anything you think is appropriate. The condition is present all the time, but the hero may be able to temporarily suppress it by succeeding in Will feat check.
Slight: The behavior does not seriously inconvenience the hero except under unusual circumstances.
Moderate: The behavior forces the hero to perform unwanted actions but rarely incapacitates him or removes him from the story.
Extreme: The behavior forces the hero to undertake actions clearly contradictory to his interests at least
once an adventure.
Damping Field The artifact must draw power from nearby sources. The drain can render energy weapons inoperative, immobilize powered armor, crash
computer systems, and ruin delicate equipment. As a side effect, it tends to atfect the hero and anyone nearby. Remember that the damping field is a drawback, not a beneficial power. Don't allow it to aid a hero more than it hinders.
Slight: The damping field has a 50% chance to activate when the arli-
fact is used, shutling down all power
sources in a 10-meter radius for |
minute.
Moderate: The damping field has 75% chance to activate when the artifact is used, shutting down all power sources in a 20-meter radius for an hour.
Extreme: The artifact periodically recharges itsell even if it hasn't been
y time the hero rolls a Critical Failure, the damping field shuts
down all power sources in a S0-meler
radius for a day. The drawback is 0% likely 1o activate when the arti-
fact is used.
Decreased Ability
An unfortunate side effect of the arti-
fact manifests as a mental or physical impediment to the hero, causing one of his Ability Scores to suffer.
This is a persistent effect that ham-
pers the hero even when the artifact isn't active or present in the hero's possession. Ifit's not clear which ability is most appropriate for the artiact to affect, roll randomly. The atfected Ability Score is reduced by 1, 2, or 3 depending on the severity (Slight, Moderate, or Extreme) of the
drawback.

Energy Cost

Ordinary: The hero is afflicted by

b The artifact uses bioelectric energy, severe depression, borderline para-
the natural energy fields of living or- noia, or hysteria. The effects last for

TM~

ganisms, to power its various func- d4 days, During this time, he suffers

tions. Each time the unit operates, it a +1 penalty to the use of any Intelli-

drains stun points from its user. For gence, Will, or Personality-based

example, the star transceiver allows skills. In addition, any time the hero

Blackouts Compulsory
behavior Damping field
Degeneration Disruptive
consciousness

conversations measured in minutes: gets a Critical Failure, he becomes

for each minute during which the

disabled for the rest of the scene.

RIITH

hero uses this function, the hero

Failure: As above, except that the

loses stun points.

duration of the attack is 2d4 days,

Stun points are lost at a rate de-

and the penalty is +2.

`pending on the severity of the arti-

Critical Failure: The character is

fact's flaw: 1,2, or 3 stuns per time

totally incapacitated for d4 weeks

unit for a Slight, Moderate, or Ex-

due to raging paranoia, raving luna-

treme drawback.

Continu-SLOBAILHY
cy. or hopeless desperation.

ous care and supervision is required

Infamous de Leech

Infamous Device
The artifact is an item of legendary powers, worshiped by rabid cults of

Slight: The hero must check once per adventure or once per month.
Moderate: The hero must check

Mental instabi Pawer spike
Uncontrolled

assassins or stolen from a govern`ment. Someone will go to any lengths to retrieve it. Naturally, surrendering the device isnt an option,

any time the artifact's powers are
used, o after any Critical Failure on askill check.
Extreme: As above, but the hero

since the fellows who want it plan on suffers a +3 penalty on his Resolve harnessing its inestimable power for skill check.

Degeneration
The artifact bombards its owner with tadiation, rendering the hero susceptible to infection by alien microbes. It might even be toxic by extended contact. The hero must make Constitution feat checks to resist bouts of illness. See "Disease" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action. Degenera-

evil Slight: The villains pick up the
hero's trail and make trouble once
every two or three adventures, such as sending in hit teams or trying to
`have the hero arrested.
Moderate: Not an adventure goes by in which the hero doesn't have to contend with someone taking a shot at getting the artifact. Even if the

Power Spike
`The artifact's alien energies cause
equipment to short out or fail. Any powered device the hero carries suffers a complete shutdown any time
she fails in an attempt 1o use it. A failed attack shuts down the hero's energy weapon, a failed Computer
Science skill check knocks out her

tion tends to weaken or incapacitate
the hero periodically, and may even &l him in time.
Slight: The hero must check once
per adventure or once per month to
see if the antifact causes illness. Moderate: The hero must check

sworn enemy doesn't appear, some opportunistic punk is going to try to
steal it or pass word of the hero's lo-
cation back to the heavyweights. Extreme: As above, except that the
artifact includes some feature or property that makes it impossible to

computer, and so on. This power
spike could also extend to ship sys-
tems the hero is manning in combat or sensitive devices that a companion is attempting to use in the hero's presence.
Slight: The device in question is

any time the artifact's powers are
used, or amy time he rolls a Critical Failure on a skill check.
Extreme: As above, but the hero suffers a +3 penalty to his initial
Constitution feat check to resist the
artifoct's degenerative influence.
Disruptive Consciousness When activated, the artifact inflicts

conceal. It might radiate a homing signal that the villains can follow.
Leech `This resembles the Energy Cost drawback (see above), but the artifact randomly selects a life force near the hero (a friend or companion) for power and drains wound points instead of stun points.

deactivated for d6 hours. Moderate: The device is damaged
and won't function until repaired. Extreme: The item or console is ru-
ined and must be replaced.
Uncontrolled Function
The artifact has the tendency to activate its powers at inconvenient
times, and to ignore the hero's des-
perate efforts to activate it.

acute pain and psychic trauma upon Mental Instability

Slight: There is a 1 in 4 chance

those nearby, resulting in a +2 penalty to all actions for d6 hours or the test of the scene, whichever is less.
Slight: Only the artifact's user is affected by the drawback.
Moderate: The disruption affects all creatures within 6 meters when the device is activated.
Extreme: Thé radius of effect is in-
creased to 20 meters.

The artifact's influences can unbal-
ance the hero's mind over time. The
hero must make periodic Resolve-
mental resolve checks to resist bouts
of depression, paranoia, manic, or catatonia, The result depends on the
hero's Resolve check:
`Amazing or Good: The hero suffers noill effects.

that the artifact simply refuses to
function when activated. Any time its user rolls a Critical Failure dur-
ing a skill check, the artifact has a 1
in 6 chance fo activate in some erro-
neous or harmful manner.
Moderate: As above, but the chance of random activation is 2 in 6.
11 Extreme: As above, but the chance
of erronecus activation is 3in 6.

One of the Gamemaster's most

creative exercises is the construction

of an imaginary world or universe. In
this realm, you decide everything.

What genre does your setting fall into?

Which Progress Level or technical
innovations can define it? What sorts

of aliens are present? How is the world

organized? Who's in charge, and why?

This chapter offers general advice on
building an exciting setting and

administering it over the

lifetime of your campaign.

Once you're familiar with the concepts presented

here, you'll move on to Chapter

14: Campaign Architecture for a

=

discussionon putting together the. hysical details of your settir

`sectors, stars, and planets.

=

specifically to accommodate science iction settings. Within the realm of F, you can choose one of three time
ntemporary, near-future, or
far-future.
contemporary setting uses the materials set forth in this book for a civ-
tionat Progress Level 5. This is,
most intents and purposes, the
~world of today. Everything you know from real life can serve as the backdrop for this campaign: modern tech-
~nology, daily news, real-world locations, political figures, media stars, and much more. Of course, you can add any num-
Getting Organized

=
b
DESIGH
CAMPAIGN

ber of twists to the contemporary setting. These twists depend on the genre (see below) that you plan to incorporate into your campaign. A
modern-day technothriller, for ex-
ample, would use high-tech weap-
ons and spy gadgets. Providing a
few items from PL 6--whether in the
`hands of the heroes, in research fa-
cilities run by villains, or secretly under development by a mysterious corporation--can make a contemporary campaign more interesting. O, you could play a contemporary setting but incorporate psionics and `mindwalking abilities for an entirely different flavor.

Near-Future

SF

A near-future campaign is set at

Progress Level 6. Like the contempo-

1ary setting, the near-future cam-

paign seems real because it's extrapolated directly from the events

and conditions of today.

What's your vision of tomorrow?

You can take a pessimistic approach and create a dark, troubled world of twilight. The genres of cyberpunk

and combat SF are examples of the

pessimistic aspect of the near future.

Or, you can lean toward optimism and create a world founded on hu-

manity's noblest elements. Coloniza-
tion of the solar system, for instance,

can serve as the basis for an opti-

mistic near-future campaign.

Far-Future

SF

A far-future campaign takes place in
acivilization at Progress Level 7 or higher. As with the near-future, the far-future setting has the ability to showcase a triumphant destiny or a terrible fate in the days ahead. Far-

future campaigns may feature faster-

than-light travel, galactic empires, exciting exploration of the unknown, `and notions of ultimate destiny.
Once you select a time frame, it's easy to decide on the general availability of equipment and prevalence of technology. More information on Progress Levels appears later in this chapter, and in Chapter 9 of the Player's Handbook.

Science fiction encompasses a num-
ber of distinct genres that represent
the types of stories you can tell. You might enjoy hard science fiction,
178where the reality of the campaign is strictly extrapolated from current

technology. Or you might favor a sci- covery of space travel in the 1850s, or ence fantasy approach, where time decide that human contact with star-

and circumstance warps the nature

{aring civilizations occurred in the

of human capabilities, and technolo- middle of the Renaissance. I the di-

gy works like magic. Alternate histo- vergence point creates a history in

1y, space opera, and cyberpunk-- which humans come into contact

these and other genres all share

with aliens--for example, a world

common roots in science fiction, but where the fraal settled on Earth

they also possess markedly different decades or centuries ago and have

characteristics.

been interacting openly with the hu-

Once you have a genre in mind, the plots, themes, and possibilities of your setting become more apparent. The major genres of science fiction
are described below. If any particu-
lar genre interests you, feel free to research it further by reading books and viewing movies that cover its themes.

mans around them--you might allow nonhuman heroes o exist.
Look for unexpected changes that your divergence may cause. For example. it's easy to imagine that France never sold the Louisiana Purchase to the United States. But what would this mean for prominent Americans born in later years in the

Alternate History

states west of the Mississippi?
Tf you want to design your setting

An alternate history campaign is one in a (relatively) short period of time,

based on the "fact" that a single key an alternate history campaign offers

event or a series of events has un-

a few distinct advantages--especial-

foided ditferently from what actually ly if you set it in contemporary times,

happened in our real world. As a result, the fictitious social, political, `and/or technological landscape of the fictional world has changed dra-

Basing your campaign on a contemporary alternate Earth reduces the amount of background work you'll have to undertake. Since your play-

`matically. Choose a significant and well-known event upon which to base your alternate history, and your players can appreciate the extent of historical drift in your world.
This genre works well in contemporary or near-future campcigns,

ers have an obvious familiarity with the setting, you won't have explain every single aspect of your world. In fact, you'll just have to detail those elements of the alternate world that differ from the real one.
Many alternate history stories set

where you can explore the ramifica- in the present day use contemporary

tions of the change. For example,

technology (PL 5). 1 the divergence

you could decide that the Roman Em- accelerates or derails civilization

pire never collapsed, and thus the

and technological development, the

Dark Ages never befell Europe. The
modern world in such a setting could be a high-tech version of the Roman Empire, a civilization locked in a Pax Romana that has existed for more

Progress Level may change too. Naturally, if your campaign oceurs ata different time in the altenate Earth's history, the technology should vary accordingly.

than two thousand years. Maybe po-

litical division is only now, in the 20th or 21st century, threatening to rend the Empire into pieces. . .

Colonization A colonization campaign places he1oes in the role of explorers, fron-

You can also use the alternate his- tiersmen, pioneers, and survivors,

tory genre to send heroes to parallel They are among the first brave souls

dimensions--worlds that look much
like their own, with at least one significant difference. Your players

1o reach and settle a new world. The
colonization effort might be the first attempts to build a lunar site, an out-

could be scientists in control of this

post on Mars, or a base among the

exploration. Or they might be heroes Iost in the dimensions, working to find a way home.
The exact nature of an alterate

Jovian moons, or it might deal with the settlement of a new star system.
`The world the heroes colonize can vary widely. Perhaps it's an inhos-

history campaign depends entirely pitable rock in need of drastic ter-

on the divergence point--the place in history where your imaginary world separates from the familiar

raforming (if it can be terraformed at all). Or it might teem with life--including other sentient species.

one. What if a scientific development The colonization genre is a rich

reshaped history? Imagine the dis-

premise for an SF campaign. A vari-

ety of crucial missions suggest them- onization of life-bearing worlds in-

specialists--who receive privileges,

selves: mapping the planet's surface, volves the presence of sentient creacataloging native lifeforms, explor- tures. How do these "aliens" ing alien sites or ruins, and weather- {actually, the natives) feel about their

the typical infantry soldier is a low- i ad
b ranking, enlisted grunt who sits at
the bottom of the chain of command.

ing unexpected natural hazards.

new neighbors? What kind of

Marines may function as special se-

There's the possibility of intrigue, strange civilization or cultural ritu- curity teams on ships or stations,

sabotage, or strife among the colo- als do they possess? These are im- serve as garrison soldiers or police

nists. What new society will arise far `portant questions to answer when

on frontier warlds, or work as scouts

from home? If the heroes lead the

designing a colonization campaign. who reconnoiter abandoned out-

colony, they must choose sites for

If you're dealing with the near-fu- posts, wrecked colonies, and pos-

settlements, figure out how to exploit ture settlement of Earth's solar sys-

sible enemy bases.

HII6dWY

existing resources, and possibly

tem, in all likelihood you have &

Heroes in mercenary companies

even undertake some social engi-

humans-only campaign. But com-

`may find themselves fighting in the

neering as they try to organize and

bine the colonization setting with an bloodiest frontiers of space, piloting

govern.

alternate history premise that the

a fighting vehicle, or going toe to toe

A colonization campaign assumes iraal have already revealed them- with the most bizarre alien enemies. HIISI0

that space travel is available. It may selves to humanity, and you have a

Depending on the laws and rules

be a near-future technology consist- situation in which members of both goveming the employment of merce-

ing of chemical rockets and one-shot species might cooperate to tame an

naries, heroes may be slave soldiers,

landers, a far-future generation ship, unsettled world. If the planet to be

crude primitives, or wealthy and

or even a starfaring vessel that

colonized already contains sentient elite professionals.

drops the heroes on a planet and

creatures, players might be able to

A combat SF campaign based on

then leaves to ferry other colony

create native heroes as the story de- a group of space law enforcers can

feams to remote destinations. How-

velops. Mutant heroes may work

also work. In this campaign, heroes

ever, it's possible that humans travel well in colonization SF. especially if travel the galaxy dispensing justice

tonew worlds by even more exotic the planet they're colonizing re-

with mass pistols and stun batons.

means--for example, a vast space- quires humans to be modified or en-

While you might expect Combat

ship could arrive and invite humans hanced in order to survive.

Specs to dominate a combat SF cam-

tojourney to other stars, or scientists

paign, they don't. Remember, sol-

can find an ancient technological Combat

relic that opens a portal across.

Combat and military activity is one

diers need officers (Diplomats), scouts (Free Agents), and armorers

space to another world.

of the most common science fiction and medics (Tech Ops). Every profes-

The technologies involved cast a genres. In a combat SF campaign, sion has its uses during warlare.

heavy influence over the nature of

heroes are members of a fighting

Combat SF is usually hard, grim,

the colony. How much support does it force engaged in futuristic wariare and realistic. Warfare in the future

teceive from the parent world? If

or conflict. They may be bughunters isn't pretty, and adventures often re-

{uster-than-light travel is impossible, who clean out alien infestations on volve around mere survival instead

generations might pass before the

distant stations and worlds, part of

of victory. However, even the most

colonists hear from their home world an elite strike force engaged in «

bloodthirsty of heroes can't put up

again--if they ever do. What kind of war against alien marauders or rival with an endless diet of firefights and

supplies do the heroes have with

human powers here on Earth, or

secret raids. If you want to base your

which to start their colony? Penal

high-tech mercenaries who accept campaign on this type of scenario,

colonists, deportees, or shipwrecked contracts to fight for various causes. create important storylines that

populations might start with nothing You can organize your players in move the heroes out of the trenches

more than the wreckage of their

any way that fits with the storyline of from time to time.

landing pods. Even well-supplied your campaign. However, three of the For example, a marine transport

colonists might face crucial short- most common organizations in com- might crash on an unidentified plan-

ages and irreplaceable equipment. bat science fiction are the fighter

et, 5o for a few adventures the heroes

Once these items break down, the

squadron, the infantry platoon, and explore the new area, investigate the

heroes must wait until a supply ship the mercenary company.

native civilization, and generally get

arrives or make do without.

As pilots and supporting members a break from the continuous fighting.

While you can build an exciting of a fighter squadron, the heroes use Similarly, military personnel might

campaign around the herces' strug- cutting-edge technology. They may receive special assignments, shore

gle against a lifeless, inhospitable serve on a planetary base, a space leave, or a transier to different posts

world, the most interesting coloniza- station, or a carrier of some kind. On behind the lines, Use devices such

tion stories deal with the settlement occasion they may undertake special as these to keep the heroes together

of worlds where life already exists. duties such as long-range scouting, and alive over the course of a dan-

What is the native ecology? Does the diplomatic missions, or weapons

gerous campaign.

world contain creatures dangerous testing. Fast-moving fighter craft en-

Combat campaigns have the ad-

to humans? You're missing out on

gaged in ship-to-ship combat should vantage of providing heroes with an

some fun if you decide that plankton play a major role in most combat ad- immediate and obvious goal. Players

and herbivores represent the sum

ventures.

know their heroes' place in the uni-

total of indigenous life on the colo-

In an infantry platoon, heroes see verse, and most of the time the he-

11 nists' new world:

their enemies through ritle sights. Toes have a clear mission to follow.

Another exciting aspect of the col- While most pilots are officers--or In addition, you have the chain of

=
b
DESIGN

command to guide the actions and adventures of the heroes--when they're ordered o explore an asteroid, they usually have little choice
but to accept.
One advantage of the combat campaign is that it can be based in
any time period, at any Progress
Level.

ploration campaign based on the charting of the local solar system, this genre usually cims higher, encompassing the stars. The heroes `may be a small survey team on a tiny scout ship, the leading officers on a huge star cruiser, independent traders trying to find new markets and resources, or even a specialized contact or landing team under the

Cyberpunk Cyberpunk is science fiction with a particular attitude. "Cyber" refers to

command of a ship's captain. An exploration campaign is epi-
sodic in nature. Each new world or

cybemetics: the melding of the bio- star system is an adventure waiting

logical and the mechanical. In this CAMPRIGN way, scientists enhance the human
body with mechanical augmenta-

to happen, a neat and self-contained package that the heroes can deal with and (usually) leave behind.

tions and even biological engineer- While a great number of adventures

ing. "Punk"" refers to the attitude that in this kind of setting can involve

infuses this setting, one that combines alienation and disillusionment, as well as an aggressive disdain for authority.

contact with new phenomena or alien societies, the heroes may occasionally take on different missions.
For instance, an interstellar govern-

In a cyberpunk future, industrial and political blocs exist globally instead of nationally, and information
networks--especially computer net-
works--control everything. Virtual reality, cyberspace, and the ability to

`ment could order a scout ship fo convey a politician to a remote post because the ship happens to be in the right sector at the right time.
Another aspect crucial to the development of an exploration cam-

project a disembodied consciousness into the world's networks are central
to the concept. Media overload and

paign is the creation of the authority, guidelines, and restrictions that govem a ship's movements and mis-

an uncomfortable density of informa- sions. If the heroes aren't the only

tion also characterize the genre. Adventures can range from covert
actions, espionage, and corporate

crew members of their vessel (for instance, they're a five-person scouting team traveling on a starcruiser with

sabotage, to data theft, murder mys- a crew of 500), you'll need to define

teries, and military SF--all within

the key supporting cast members

the framework of a dark, near-future
world where technology has merged
with humanity, perhaps to the detri-
ment or elevation of both.
Most cyberpunk campaigns take place in the near future, though elements of the genre could appear in any Progress Level. While most of

who are likely to interact with the `heroes on a regular basis.
You could offer up a hard science exploration campaign involving charting and survey missions and paying careful attention to habitability zones, spectral classes, and the rules of planetary formation detailed

these campaigns offer a dark dream later in this book. In such a case,

of the days to come, there's no reason `many stars in the galaxy will be next

you can't create a reasonably bright and optimistic cybernetic setting. Obviously, this type of campaign

to useless from a human point of view--although substantial concentrations of rare minerals might war-

should utilize the rules for computers rant prospecting.

and cybernetics detailed in the Player's Handbook.

On the other hand, you can play an exploration campaign as science fantasy, unveiling marvel after mar-

Exploration
Exploration of the stars is usually the first theme people think of when the words "science fiction" are spoken. In this type of campaign, heroes. adventure out on the fringe of human space, explore new worlds and new civilizations, and aspire to challenge
160the great unknown. Although you could run o fine ex-

vel as the heroes encounter time portals, advanced civilizations, and
worlds that illustrate « meaningful
human condition. In any event, a
team of heroes should include at
least one Diplomat, since meeting
new races could constitute one of the
chief features of the campaign. Interstellar travel is usually a
`must for this type of setting, and

hence PL7 is probably the minimum
base Progress-evel. A PL 6 exploration campaign, in which travel takes place at sublight speeds, is possible, but it will have a far different scope and flavor, because sucha
campaign centers on the exploration of a single star system.
Future Earth
The future Earth story examines a possibility. What's waiting for us in
the centuries or millennia to follow?
A nuclear or ecological catastrophe? An alien invasion? Dangerous, or
wonderful, new technologies? Will
humanity remain the dominant species on the planet?
A future Earth campaign can involve an astonishing variety of conditions, technologies, and heroic
roles. The entire world may have blown itseli back to squalid savagery by nuclear war. Or maybe a select groups of humans lives in an age of grace and learning, hidden away from the apocalypse that dev-
astated the rest of the world. Even if
`humanity's physical condition advances drastically, new social prob-
lems may arise to form the focus of a
campaign. For example, a world without sickness, hunger, or hardship could be ravaged by the tyranny of dictators. Repairing such a broken utopia can be quite a challenge, even if the heroes never confront raw physical danger.
Building a future Earth is much
like creating an alternate history
campaign. You don't need to postu-
late any major divergences in histo1y: events to the present day are unchanged. Instead, extrapolate key event, development, or situation
that defines the world of the future,
and then build the campaign to fi
For a low-tech survival campaign,
think about a future in which our
modern society declines in both knowledge and civilization. If you want aliens in your future Earth campaign, think about how they traveled to Earth, what happened when they arrived, and how they coexist with humanity. Be careful of creating worlds that are too ad-
vanced or civilized; heroes need
frontiers and enemies--in a society without these challenges, there's
little for them to do.
A timeline is a good tool for build-
ing this sort of campaign. It's nothing
more than a list of dates, beginning with the modern day and working

In this futurity, fruit is worth its wei

forward to the campaign's present civilization had advanced to PL 6 at

day. If your future Earth has endured some time in the past. World Wars IIl and IV, make a note

about when and why these wars

Horror

were fought.

The premise of horror SF centers on

Influential people, landmark leg- the presence of dark creatures and

islation, international affairs, and

phenomena inimical to human life.

major new inventions probably de- Heroes are frail and vulnerable in serve notations on your timeline-- the face of terrible, unintelligible

especially if they're completely imaginary or speculative. Its easy

evils, and only quick thinking and luck can preserve their lives.

for your players to accept the intro-

Apply the conventions of tradi-

duction of superconducting technolo- tional horror to a science fiction set-

gy, since scientists are currently

ting: alien invaders that insidiously

exploring this field. But if you want possess humans through subtle or

players to accept teleportation and overt means; heroes stranded in an

antigravity, you should explain how isolated area where fear and terror these technologies came to be--not can breed; monsters that are other-

in painstaking scientific detail, but worldly in nature or the result of

atleast in general terms that makes scientific experiment gone awry.

their development believable.

Technology has a dark side, and you

When deciding on the Progress can use this to great effect in a hor-

Level at which to sel a future Earth campaign, think about the history

ror SF setting In order for a horror story to work,

you've going

created. forward.

oDrosylioduingseebtahcekw?orld

the plot must involve threats that are beyond human understanding. You

Major catastrophes, diseases, or eco- should place the heroes in a position nomic collapse may result in a rever- to encounter these threals and tem-

sion to more primitive technologies. porarily defeat them, or at least sur

Its theoretically possible, for in-

vive them. Players should never be

stance, for a future Earth setting to

certain of the outcome; as far as they

be at PL 5, or even PL 4, even though Kknow, the creatures and phenomena

in your campaign have the ability to
kill or maim their heroes, or drive
them insane, in each and every game session.
It's your job to create situations in
which the players would never want to find themselves. In a good horror game, your players should experience twinges of fear and unease. The very notion of finding themselves in the same boat as their heroes should send shivers of fright down their spines. Make use of maddening anticipation, foreshadowing of a doom too horrible to imagine, and false shelter or security from a threat Above all, create dark, dismal. and unnerving settings in which fiendish plots can unfold.
The horror SF campaign can take many forms. For example, you can create a standard exploration or colonization scenario in dark universe. Imagine the plight of colonists stranded on a world with ancient
evils slumbering in alien ruins, stir-
ring in hunger once the heroes disturb their rest.
Or, add the backdrop of cosmic
horror to any other campaign setting.
A utopian saciety that discovers
181 forces and creatures of astonishing

power and malevolence lurking in the galactic shadows makes for a truly horrifying setting. Horror SF stories can also involve alien creatures that invade the relatively close confines of a spaceship or space station. An alien predator species could come to Earth and begin hunting and killing humans for sport.
Horror is difficult to sustain in any
venue, but especially so in « science fiction setting. A campaign usually encompasses the continuing adventures and advancement of the heroes from story to story--but most horror stories are about survival. Finding a way to let the heroes live in order to
adventure again is difficult. Doing so
while maintaining the credibility of ahorrible threat or menster is even more challenging. After all, if the force or creature in question wasn't tough enough to destroy the heroes the first time around, why should they be airaid of it? In order to maintain tension and terror, you must find away to keep the heroes in the line of fire while allowing the threat to evolve with time.
The availability of aliens as heroic characters instills a sense of wonder in a game setting. However, in « horror campaign, it's often a good idea to downplay the marvelous. Therefore, you might want to limit the number of alien species avail able to be used for heroes. If you decide to use the standard aliens described in the Player's Handbook, make them more mysterious and inhuman. Perhaps they have goals and desires that the human heroes find incomprehensible or threatening. Or they may exist as savages or indentured servants deliberately denied technology--lostering the impression of a superior humanity in well-ordered universe.
Any of the game options--mutants, psionics, and cybertech--are appropriate to this selting, but in horror SF every benefit should have a heity price tag. If a player wants to run a Mindwalker hero, make sure that the hero runs across psionic ter-
rors that can slice his mind to rib-
bons. Make Mindwalkers, mutans, and cyborgs the subjects of hatred and fear in a horror setting--not only do they have to worry about the insidious threat against which they battle, but they must also protect themselves against a society that views them as horrors themselves
In a horror campaign, the irra-

tional intrudes into the rational world of science. With this intrusion comes fear, and thus SF and horror collide in fascinating and disturbing ways. Many times, this collision is the result of supernatural occurrences--often butiressed by a ratio-
nal, quasiscientific explanation.
Other times, it's just the result of
technology employed without moral
guidelines or restraint, You can set an Earth-based horror
SF campaign in almost any time and age--although you might consider it an allernate history campaign if it's set deep in the past. Since technolo. gy grows more poweriul at higher Progress Levels, you might deliber-
ately disallow, suppress, or pervert
key technologies the heroes could

otherwise use. For instance, star tzavel may be much more dangerous or uncertain in horror SF campaign than in @ normal exploration or space opera sefting.
Space Dpera
Space opera deals with epic themes, such as the struggle of civilization against ancient evils, alien invaders, or sinister galactic empires, Meanwhile, the characters and stories preserve a tight focus by using these greal ongoing struggles as a back-
drop. For example, you can create a
story around heroes who fight in a war, work as spies, or engage in var-
ious missions for their cause. The
backdrop is an epic tale of interplan-
etary or interstellar conflict.

Space opera doesn't have to be full of fleet commanders and bright, shining heroes. It can be grim and realistic, driven by characters both
human and flawed.
It's easy to keep a space opera campaign on track, because at the heart of the setting is clear enemy or hostile power against which the heroes must stand. Even if they're
ot leaders and rulers, heroes will
find themselves at the center of pivotal events, their actions helping to determine the outcome of the great contlict between good and evil.
Space opera deals with the big picture: a galaxy-spanning empire, an immedigte and overwhelming
problem to threaten the heroes, and.
plenty of elbow room for the heroes tobounce from world to world in the pursuit of their goal. Space opera characters and settings are generalIy larger than life, caricatures designed to capture one aspect or trait and magnify it for the story. Instead
of Earthlike worlds with a mix of ter-
tain, space opera features venues
such as the Lava Planet, the Jungle
Planet, and the Ice Planet. The presence of a clear conlict
doesn't necessarily force everyone 1o take sides, Many characters may have questionable loyalties, uncertain motivations, or personal agendos. Even in the face of galactic war, smugglers, crime bosses, or corrupt governors might try to make as much `money as possible from the conflict.
Having the heroes deal with these
secondary threats or interests may be a welcome diversion from coping with the omnipresent danger or conflict that drives the campaign.
In the typical space opera, alien species are abundant. Feel Iree to in-
troduce as many weird aliens as you
like. And since this type of campaign is 50 diverse, you can modify the mules any way that makes sense. If You want to limit or restrict the game options mentioned in the Player's Handbook, stipulate that heroes who choose these options must belong to cerlain species or organizations. For instance, cybernetics may be expensive or illegal in most human societies, so a hero with cybemetic implants might necessarily be a representative of a particular planet that has a relatively relaxed attitude
toward cyberware. When elements of science fantasy
are added to Space opera, the setting
becomes even wilder. Such cam-

paigns cross into the realm of pulp
fiction--where magic exists beside
high-tech wonders, and a hero

= els ahead of the rest of the world--
especially Tech Op heroes who build their own superadvanced gadgets.

wields a wand in one hand and a
laser pistol in the other. Consider

Technothriller

b

using the FX system detailed in
Chapter 16: Optional Rules in this
type of campaign.
Space opera campaigns require at
least Progress Level 6 technology. Generally, you're probably better off designating Progress Level 7 or 8 for

A technothriller campaign usually
takes place in a world much like our own. It's @ modern or near-future setting, without the flashy technology of star travel and antigravity. Of course, heroes may have marvelous
HIIYANED
gadgets and devices to help them do

such a campaign. Don't forget that

their job--action heroes and super-

isolated areas of inferior--or superi- spies always have access to gear

or--technology may exist.

that's more advanced than stuif you

can find at the local electronics

shop. HOIS30

Superheroic

The best way to bring heroes into

Comic books feature all kinds of sci- this kind of campaign is to enlist

ence fiction elements--secret re-

them as secret agents working for an

search labs, experimental energy

intelligence organization. The orga-

weapons, powered armor, aliens

nization may be your rendition of

from distant worlds, and dimension- something realistic, such as the CIA,

al invaders. A superheroic SF cam- or a fictional shadow-intelligence

paign assumes that heroes are

agency. As top field operatives, the

individuals who, because of special hexoes receive orders that they must

and even unique abilities, stand

carry out using their own ingenuity.

`head and shoulders above the most

In a technothriller setting, herces

talented normals.

operate in a shadowy world of char-

You can easily un a low-powered ismatic enemy spies, assumed iden-

superheroic game using the stan-

tities, and mysterious contacts. They

dard rules and options presented in get involved in some real-world espi-

the Player's Handbook. For more

onage activities from time to time,

`powertul superheroics, use the FX

such as shadowing suspected infor-

system detailed in Chapter 16: Op- `mants, going on surveillance mis-

tional Rules. Assume that only a few sions, and wading through computer

supercharacters can possess these files or financial records to track

abilities, while the rest of the world down payotfs and expose fake busi-

contains supporting characters with ness fronts. Discovering the identity

none of these powers.

and identifying the vulnerability of

The superhero genre features one an enemy should be a large part of

particular plot device that's indis-

such a campaign--as well as daring

pensable--the superhero team.

rescues, sabotage, or other covert-ac-

Many of the most famous super-

tion missions for the combat-orient-

heroes are part of superhero groups, ed players.

combining their efforts to stop vari-

Aliens don't play lead roles in the

ous villains and threats that trouble typical technothriller setting. In the

the rest of the world. Superhero

classic form of this campaign, the

teams often share a base facility,

hero is smart, tough, charming,

while traveling throughout an area quick--and human. Mutants and

to answer calls of need.

Mindwalkers may be appropriate for

While many superhero tales are

one-of-a-kind superagents, but be

set in & world much like contempo- careful about setting such characters

rary Earth, you shouldn't feel limited loose in an otherwise normal world.

to the late 20th century--a World War Cybernetics may exist on a modest

1l time frame could work just fine. O, level, in the form of special devices

you can advance your story into the `built for agents.

future, working superherces into a

A near-future technothriller could

galactic espionage or space opera take place in the early days of solar

setting.

system colonization. In the far future,

Typically, superheroes and super- suave corporate spies could ply their

villains have access to extremely trade in the business rivalries of a

advanced technology compared to

galaxy-spanning society.

their society's standards; therefore,

allow heroes to make use of some
equipment one or two Progress Lev-

163

Tone After you've determined the time frame and the genre of your campaign, the next step is to decide its tone. The three different shades of tone that you can use are realistic, heroic, and superheroic.

Realistic

A realistic campaign can be deadly for heroes, because they possess rel-

atively little power. Certain types of technothrillers, colonization cam-

paigns, and most horror SF settings benefit from this tone. In a realistic

campaign, heroes are normal people

thrown into extraordinary situations

To reflect this circumstance, they receive only 48 points to distribute among their six Ability Scores.
You can change other aspecs of the rules to make the campaign setting even tougher. For instance, you can lower the Ability Score maxi-

Scores. Players receive 72 points to
distribute among their heroes' Ability Scores in this type of campaign. In addition, they can use most of the optional rules--including the FX system presented in Chapter 16,

mums for humans to 12. You can declare that heroes aren't entitled to the profession-based cost reductions when purchasing skills, so that Combat Spec pays as much for Melee Weapons as a Diplomat does.
Finally, the optional rules for mutants, psionics, and cybemetics are unavailable in a realistic campaign.

Creating a Unigue Tane You can easily modify the rules to create your own unique campaign. For example, you could set hero Ability Score points at 55, or increase the basic point cost for skills.
Remember, however, that the information in the Player's Handbook

Heroic The heroic campaign is the assumed base for an ALTERNITY campaign; the
rules in the Player's Handbook are
written to accommodate this tone of play. In « heroic campaign, you can use all the rules that you feel comfortable incorporating into your game world--including professions and their associated benefits, 60

reflects a heroic baseline. If you decide to modify your campaign tone, keep this in mind. Increasing skill costs in a realistic campaign penalizes heroes (and their players) severely. Likewise, decreasing skill costs in a superheroic campaign may make things a bit too easy for your heroes, since they already receive additional Ability Score points.

points for Ability Scores, and which-

sties where high technology is present, but not widely available. Even today, regions of our real world are inhabited by people subsisting on Stone Age technology. In « futuristic, starfaring campaign, unspoiled or
undiscovered planets might exist
whose technological advancements lag far behind the Progress Levels of the capital worlds.
While it might seem that PL 6 or 7 technology is prerequisite for a starfaring campaign, this isn't the case. Imagine an Earth the same as our modern world with one exception: At some point, a wrecked alien spacecraft was dismantled and the secrets of its FTL drive were revealed. Space travel would still be risky and expensive--since life support, ship structure, sensors and communications, and other spacefaring technologies are barely sufficient to sustain a human in orbit-- but it's possible to envision a PL §society engaged in the survey and exploration of nearby star systems.

everof the optional rules fit the sto

PROGRESS ties you want to tell. LEVEL A heroic campaign resembles the
reality of action movies--heroes can attempt the near-impossible and have a slight chance to succeed, and death isn't the automatic result of combat scene. You can use all of the SF genres within the framework of a heroic campaign.
Superheroic A superheroic campaign follows the adventures of heroes who are far above the norm. This is comic-book reality, replete with high-powered mutants and psionicists, heroes with advanced gadgets and superpowers,
184and higher-than-average Ability

Travel in

Starfaring

Chapter 9: Goods & Services in the Campaigns

caagMPgLttaialPeooammPvsyLntLpeee'slarm64s'imt,,gsooew5necrdH,ahheohsanriorucnniofrhgbd-letd,obhoswiagomseyiohcahrokialo.rclserwdaooemadcwftiihpeesnweatcveyiiosg'eeAsunnlPloscoLdrerpTaobrfmreegEie-crseRsteeniesNottts.nITYataotHfhhrnnooigesmwreeyenxoq'dspruwueolerooasrcsrtoltiaadwfaotmrndiofotaiprovnrlaidhenwiarggsoossntferol.ddarcs?yiSupfpfcliertenToiucrehfrieonweaenusclhicneaziednactfsrthibawicoeveettfentihfrwole;encettheoisen-

However, science fiction doesn't always imply superior technology. Alternate history or future Earth campaigns might deposit the heroes

roes have access to faster-than-light travel, and one in which they don't Even within these two broad categories, you can divide the explo-

ina world of postholocaust savagery. Similarly, many people live in soci-

ration story further by the type of locomotion that transports the he roes from place to place.

While many science fiction campaigns never leave the planet Earth or the bounds of its solar system, a greater portion assume that heroes can travel from star to star. If you i tend to run a campaign where interstellar travel is possible for the heroes, you must decide whether they are limited to vessels that are slower than light, or whether they can use faster-than-light (FTL) travel.
Slower-Than-Light
Travel While many science fiction writers casually assume the existence of FIL travel, the scientific reality of the situation isn't so convenient. Its physically impossible for an object toattain a velocity greater than the speed of light. At best, scientists can conceive of spaceships traveling at 99.99% of the speed of light ... but even at this speed, travel between distant stars is hideously slow.
Earth's nearest stellar neighbors are a little more than 4 light-years away, which means that something. moving from here at the speed of light would take more than four years to arrive at the nearest star. True interstellar exploration might involve distances of 20, 30, 100, or even 1,000 light-years, Such voyages, undertaken al sublight speeds. seem incredibly impractical.
The amount of energy needed to propel a ship across such distances also presents a real problem. Right now, scientists can envision accelerating ships up to 1% of the speed of
light. Traveling to the Sun's closest
stellar neighbor at that speed would take more than four centuries. In
order to make the trip in something
close to the time it takes light to travel. you'd need an engine or power source of unprecedented efficiency. A chemical rocket doesn't possess sufficient power, and its fuel tanks are prohibitively large; the slowerthan-light ship must use another propulsion method.
Ii you're interested in running a campaign that utilizes slower-thanlight travel, you must consider a suitable engine. A few propulsion ideas appear below. You can use one or all of them in your campaign, or you can create an entirely new propulsion system.
» Nuclear-powered ion engine: This power system is not powerful enough to escape a planet's gravity well, but it could be ignited in orbit

= heroes to travel great interstellar
distances within their lifetimes--relatively speaking, of course.

For example, an astronaut could b

embark on an interstellar voyage at

near light speed, making a round

trip that takes him 10 years to com-

plete. However, on his return, he

would discover that nearly 50 years

have passed for those people he left

behind on Earth.

use RIIbdWED
Abit of technology you might

to permit interstellar travel in a

slower-than-light campaign is cryon-

ics. Cryonic technology places star-

farers in hibernation--their bodily HIISIO

and thereafter stretch its uel for a very long period of acceleration
» Fusion drive: Fueled by hydrogen atoms scooped from interstellar gas clouds, this ship could acceler-

functions slowed to a whisper above death--until someone or something
wakes them at their destination.
Some crewmembers might rotate on a watch schedule, remaining awake
for a year or two at a time before re-

ate continuously as it draws fuel
from interstellar space.

turning to cold sleep for the duration of the voyage.

» Accelerating through an exter-

Finally, you can employ a tradi-

nal force: This method would diminish or negate the requirement for fuel. A gigantic magnetic array could accelerate a ship as a bullet is shot from a gun, or a stationary laser could push a ship equipped with solar sails.
» Completely imaginary technolo-

tional science fiction concept: the
generation ship, a vessel so large that it's basically a traveling world. Almost all of the crew members aboard a generation ship live their entire lives without seeing their destination. By the time the ship reaches the end of its journey, several gener-

gy: Playing on the "fiction" in sci-
ence fiction, you could postulate a

ations have lived and died. It's possible that such a ship could travel

hypothetical propulsion system that wouldn't require huge amounts of fuel--such as an antimatter engine.

thousands of years in order to com-
plete its voyage.
Regardless of how you explain it

Even if relativistic velocities of 70%, 80%, or 90% of light speed are attained, a trip from one star to another would take years. However, scientists and writers spend much of their time imagining solutions to this problem. Your science fiction cam-

slower-than-light travel isn't conducive to a star-hopping campaign. Consider sublight travel for a campaign in which you want the heroes
to stay in one star system for long periods of time--a colonization sce-
nario, for example. Optionally, the heroes might crew a fast-moving

paign isn't stillborn if you decide that FTL travel is impossible. Several devices can explain how the crew of a slower-than-light interstellar

starship that doesn't return to a plan-
et for hundreds of years of local time--while only a few months pass for the heroes. This way, the heroes

ship endures such a long trip. The first of these plot considera-
tions uses the principle of relativity, as expressed in Einstein's special

could make planetfall at new systems several times during their lifetimes, while the rest of the galaxy ages by a millennium.

theory of relativity. One implication

of that theory is time dilation, a term that describes what happens when time moves more slowly in the frame of reference of someone aboard a fast-moving object. Thus, passengers on a ship raveling at a high fraction

Faster-Than-Light Travel
1 the prospects for interstellar travel under the confines of Einstein's theo1y depress you, then you can simply imagine that your universe does

of light speed would experience the passage of time more slowly than their planet-bound counterparts. The concept of time dilation allows your

enjoy FIL travel. Heroes can hop into a ship and make the journey of alife-
185 time in a matter of weeks or even
days. If you want FTL travel in your

= game, you have several choices for defining how it works. Here are @ fow:

b

» Ships accelerate past the speed of light but remain in the physical

bly high velocities, travel will take
some time, and many voyages re-
main impractical if not impossible.
For instance, assuming that a ship is
capable of accelerating to 100 times

large and wealthy organizations that

can afford to wait years or decades

for results.

1

The Gravity Age (PL 7): Insystem

travel is commonplace, fast, and con-

universe.

the speed of light, a trip to the center venient; a person can cross from one

» Ships jump, teleport, fold space, of our Milky Way galaxy--30,000 side of a star system to the other in

or enter another dimension to effec-
tively exceed the speed of light.
DESIGH
» Ships don't carry FTL drives:

light-years away--would still take 300 years. To make matters worse, the closest galaxy to the Milky Way

hours or days. Many individuals can afford interplanetary vessels. Fasterthan-light interstellar travel is ex-

they use some manufactured or nat- is about five times farther away than pensive, but generally accessible

ural condition (a stargate, wormhole,the galactic center. Thus, an FTL orblack hole) to throw them across drive needs to smash the light-speed

and comfortable. FTL ships are owned and operated primarily by

the stars.

`barrier beyond recognition in order national and planetary govern-

» Planetary bases or facilities uti-
There CAMPRIGH lize teleportation for travel. are no FTL starships--instead, objects and people are sent to other

1o have any usefulness for intet-
galactic travel. Convenience represents the ease
with which members of a starfaring

ments, large corporations, and a few wealthy individuals.
The Energy Age (PL 8): Interstellar travel continues to improve, becom-

stars by transportation platforms, time arches, or similar devices.

species can utilize FTL technology. Even if cheap, fast FTL travel is

ing easily affordable for anyone with a reasonable income or credilt rating.

available in your campaign setting, Some vessels can travel hundreds of

There are several ways that you can travelers may not necessarily use it light-years in a matter of weeks.

structure the mechanism of FTL trav- regularly: The technology involved

el within each of the above-stated
scenarios. For instance, ships in your

may have a high failure rate; the stresses and rigors of FTL travel may

Communication

campaign could achieve light speed kill, drive people insane, or create

In @ modern campaign, your heroes

while remaining in the physical uni- long-lasting health problems; or the can pull out o cellular phone or

verse if they were rendered com-

passage of the ship may somehow shortwave radio and talk to anybody

pletely inertialess. Even a simple

damage or wear out the space

in the world. With faxes, modems,

tusion drive can reach interstellar around the vessel, thus limiting the and even videophones, there's no

speeds if it's pushing a mass of ab- number of FTL vessels that can ar-

limit to & character's ability to call

solutely zero.

tive at or depart from a particular for help, check facts, or keep in touch

O, your campaign could include a system or planet in given span of with his superiors. However, the

drive that encapsulates ships ina

time.

issue of communications becomes

warping lield, an event that allows

crucial in any star-spanning

them to exceed the speed of light. Travel and

campaign.

The net result is that the ship roars

Progress Level

The basic problem is the same

through real space, physically tra-

1t you don't have any specific notions one that was addressed in the dis-

versing the distance of its journey of how interstellar travel originated cussion of faster-than-light travel: A

but breaking Einstein's laws in the

in your campaign or what its capa-

radio wave travels at the speed of

process.

bilities are, use the following base-

light, and sometimes that's just not

While the pseudoscience varies line categories to help identify the

fast enough. Of course, this speedis

from story to story, every FTL method technological level of a particular

fine for connections between two lo-

has three characteristics: expense,

culture or society.

cations on the surface of a planet, or

speed, and convenience.

The Information Age (PL 5): Based a surface location and a station in

Expense refers to the ease with

as it is on chemical rockets, inter-

orbit; virtually instantaneous com-

which society can build faster-than- planetary travel during this age is

munication is possible in such cases.

light ships or facilities; it determines expensive, slow, and inconvenient.

Across interplanetary distances,

the overall abundance of FTL travel. Only the largest private concerns or the light-speed restriction is a nui-

For example, only rich nations and

wealthy nations can afford to send

sance, but a tolerable one. Earth is

corporations could afford to main- people into space. Interstellar travel about 8 light-minutes from the Sun,

tain an FTL drive that requires rare aboard generation ships may be re- meaning that a starship near the

elements--the average individual motely possible with a Herculean, Sun could talk to an Earth-based sta-

simply cant afford to own or maybe worldwide effort.

tion with an 8-minute time lag. How-

even travel on an FTL ship.

The Fusion Age (PL 6): Interplane- ever, ships or stations in the outer

Expense doesn't always involve tary travel is atfordable, moderately reaches of a system--say, the vicini-

materials. It can also represent the

fast, and generally convenient. Many ty of Neptune or Pluto--experience «

requirements for specially trained private businesses and organiza-

time lag of hours from the time they

personnel. For example, a ship may tions can afford interplanetary trans- send a message to the time it reach-

require the services of a world-class port and facilities, and all but the

es its destination.

Mindwalker to trigger its drive or

smallest nations have offworld con-

In extreme cases involving inter-

navigate it through interstellar

cerns. Slower-than-light interstellar stellar distances, a communication

space.

travel, by means of generation ships signal traveling at the speed of light

186Speed is am important characteris- or ships that travel at a significant could take decades, or even centutic of an FTL drive. Even at incredi- fraction of light speed. is possible for ries, to reach its destination.

The good news is that in a campaign featuring faster-than-light travel, you can decide that technolo-
gy exists that also allows communi-
cation signals to exceed the speed of

etary formation, habitability zones, and world chemistry. If, on the other hand, you want extraterrestrial lile
1o be nonexistent (or at least undis-
covered) and you decide that human-

and interesting enough to sustain most SF settings all by themselves,
13 But even if you restrict aliens to a
B secondary role, that role can be vital-
ly important. For instance, if you're

light. People who need to contact one ity can only survive on planets that running a near-future or horror cam-

another can send messages, instead can be terraformed, use more strin- paign, you can use aliens--or the

of using couriers aboard ships to

gent paramelers in your campaign. hint of aliens--to add mystery and

convey information.

excitement to the campaign.

If comm signals can only move as We're Alone

fast as the typical FTL ship, then starships moving from one system to

In this lype of campaign setting, extraterrestrial life is virtually nonexis-

Campaign

NDIHANED

the next will most likely be used to

tent. The sheer improbability of

Evolution

carry communications between

finding other planets that contain

worlds. Long-distance communica- the necessary elements for the natur-

tion in the campaign will resemble al development of life makes human-

the way it worked on Earth in the

ity's colonization attempts the focus

early 1800s; Ships cross the oceans of of such settings.

space in a given span of time, and

Lifeless worlds, even though they

all message trafic moves at the

don't serve as sources of alien antag-

same pace.

onists, can still be interesting adven-

You could design a campaign that ture sites, bases, or outposts. A

features FTL communication but

lifeless world may have mineral or

slower-than-light travel. In such a

energy resources waiting to be ex-

sefting, it's fairly easy to slay in

ploited.

touch, but electronic information is

If Earthlike worlds are rare among

the only thing that can pass between the stars, any planet with a reason-

star systems in anything resembling able temperature and some kind of

atimely fashion. It could take years. atmosphere can be a candidate for

for a rescue mission to reach an en- terraforming. Using tailored microor-

dangered colony, despite the fact

ganisms, robotic factories, or aster-

that the rest of the galaxy knows of oid strikes, colonists might be able lo

the trouble minutes after it appears. alter a planet's atmosphere in a mat-

A campaign is a dynamic entity that

continually grows and changes. Dur-

ing the game,

your players

make will

H3IS30

choices that alter the face of the

campaign. It's up to you to respond to

those choices in a way that is both

believable and consistent with the

universe you've created.

A vibrant campaign evolves dur-

ing the course of play. What hap-

pens, for example, when the heroes succeed in pulting down the rebel-

lion? Do they take role in the new

government? Do they move into the

private sector and start an interstel-

lar trading company? Do they wanderoff to explore the next star

system? How you answer questions

such as these will help to determine

what direction your campaign takes

1f contact between star systems
isn't important for the purposes of

ter of decades.

as it evolves,

What's the your campaign setting, you can

We're Not Alone

simply stick with a realistic model in This type of campaign assumes that

which travel is slower than light and extratenrestrial life is abundant. He- Adventure?

communication is limited o light speed. This represents the universe as we know it today: Planetary populations will be effectively isolated, carrying out their business withoul hearing from their neighbors elsewhere in the galaxy.
FREQUENCY oF LiFe
The next step in developing your own campaign setting is populating it. Naturally, the frequency of life
isn't a consideration for present-day
technothriller or near-future Earth SF settings, but the general population of the universe is a major issue in a
starfaring game.
Lite-bearing planets may occur often in your campaign, or they may be extremely scarce. You get to decide. How many alien species and

1oes regularly interact with members of other species, both as fellow ad-
venturers and as supporting cast
members. An alien-heavy campaign provides players and Gamemasters

The final basic issue to be tackled in
the process of campaign design is
determining what sorts of adven-
tures you want your setling to ac-
commodate. What quests will your

with a variety of roleplaying possi-
bilities. Diplomatic missions, journeys of exploration, interstellar trade, and galactic war become possible with the introduction of other species (o your universe.
Before you create a horde of extraterrestrial life, think about what
role these aliens will play in your
setting. Do you want players to be able 1o create alien heroes, allowing

heroes undertake? Are they exploring uncharted planets, lighting a ruthless alien enemy, undertaking missions of espionage and sabotage
against rival corporations, or taming
an unsettled world? Think about what kinds of adventures you like o run, what kinds of adventures your players like to play. and then consider what sort of universe or setting al-
lows you to create these adventures.

them to explore your campaign set-
ting from a nonhuman point of view? Do you want to involve the heroes in stories that demand the presence of aliens as part of the setting? Or do you just want to have a sense of the exofic and unusual surrounding the heroes as they pursue their careers?

An exotic setting by itself isn't au-
tomatically a source of good adven-
tures--the setting needs to feature a
storyline or a threat that serves asa way to motivate the heroes. See Chapter 15: Adventure Design for details on how to accomplish this goal.

habitable worlds do you want? If you

Many fine science fiction stories

want a lot of them, use a fairly gen- don't involve aliens as central charerous set of assumptions about plan- acters; humans are certainly diverse

167

BEGINNING

could make it easier for the rebellion have apartments on Earthport, like to

1o succeed.

do their drinking at Harry's Cafe on

DEsIGN

Sites of Interest

the planet Mars, and then spend
their time chasing pirates and smug

It could take thousands of words to

To start the process of detailing your glers among the moons of Jupiter,

describe a single city in detail, let star system--but
don't despair: Fleshing out a good etting for your campaign isn'tnecessarily a full-time job, For starters, you can get by with a strategic map, alocal map, and five to ten detailed locations in each area. Develop other areas as the campaign progresses.

strategic map, it's a good idea to identify anywhere from five to ten in-
teresting sites (nations, systems, or
`empires) and create thumbnail sketches of each. You don't need to describe each of these sites' leaders
as a supporting character, but it
might be useful o create a supporting character who represents each

that's fine--as long as the technology in your campaign supports su large temitory. For example, the lo area of « campaign that uses co ventional chemical propulsion is probably quite smaller than th local area of a campaign that utiliz FTL
travel. Not every part of the area
needs to be equivalent in

large nation or power and is respon- scale--a local area might consist of

Strategic Map sible for dealing with heroes in an

A strategic

map is a comprehensive

official capacity--perhaps a midlevel functionary such as a scout,

guide to the areas in your campaign agent, or administrator.

a few hundred square miles of plan-
etary surface, plus the interior of a
high-orbit spaceport thousands of miles away.

world. It contains information on

Local Map ace sectors, planetary systems, in-

Sites of Interest

dual planets, and just about any other significant location.

Once you decide what your local Alocal map shows a relatively small area consists of, you should create

When creating a strategic map. area (compared to what a strategic five to ten sites of interest and place

think first about the places you want
the heroes to explore. Do you antici-

map depicis) in which you expect the hexoes to remain for at least the first

your campaign shifting its focus {ow adventures of a campaign. It

them within that area. A site of inte: est can be something as lair of a dangerous creat L or

pe over time? Place some
blank areas or frontier systems on the strategic map, This allows you to

could take several forms: a street-by- something ascomplexs an alien

street map of a city, station, or out

city, a crimelord's he iquarters, or a

post; a county-sized map marking

bustling spaceporAtt a minimum,

expand the campaign later.

towns, natural landmarks, creature provide at least one place the heroes

The se

issue to consider is

lairs, and ruins; @ map of a nation or

the politics of the area, Where are

an entire planet, noting the area's

i e villains of the car xign, and

most prominent cities and physical

why do hey exist? What high-level features; or a map of a star system

forces m ht eventually impact the heroes in their own local campaign

showing where the plneets are. Usually, the heroes can reach any

area? For example, if the hero

spot in the local campaign area with

home arec is part of a system that's aminimum of preparation. Some of

ing against galactic tyranny, the heroes may know the area well

any of their adventures could in-

and have a good idea of the political

Ive dealing with attacks by enemy and geographical landscape.

forces,

The size of the local area can vary

and infiltrators; or seqrching for a

according to the circumstances of

m of technology that your setting. If your players' heroes

can use as their b of operations, a
couple of areas where they can go to
gather information or socialize, and
a few locations that might offer c!
lenges to them. for Each site of inter Styou create
. the local area should contain a porting character or two. This is good way to begin stocking your campaign setting with interesting
personalities.

14STAR SECTORS

The most ambitious lask you face

when creating a starfaring cam-

paign is the design of a piece of the galaxy to call your own. A galaxy is a titanic place, containing billions of

Province

10 LY 100 LY

s0 5,000

1 LY/hex 5 LY/hex

stars. If humanity ever develops FTL

1,000 LY

500,000

50 LY/hex

travel, it would take centuries or millennia to survey just the spiral arm of the Milky Way in which Earth is lo-

10,000 LY 50,000,000 100,000 LY 5,000,000,000

500 LV/hex

ARCHITECTURE cated, let alone the entire galaxy. Naturally, not every campaign needs a star map. If your campaign is built axound modern-day espi-

Developing Sector

a '

onage, an alternate history or a future Earth that doesn't involve space

`The easiest way to create a sector is to come up with five or ten star sys-

travel, or even a near-future space

tems that you want to showcase,

opera, making a star map for it is un- then mark each as a dot on the map

CAMPRIGH

necessary. However, a good map of a well-designed sector is an indis-

in the relative location you think is best. Although stars may have

pensable lool for creating a starfaring campuign.
The following section contains rules for designing your own stellar areas--beginning with sectors and

dozens of planets and hundreds of outposts in their vicinity, you don't need to worry about detailing them at the sector level. Star systems are described in detail in the next step of

gradually narrowing the focus o individual planets and civilizations.

this process.
A piece of paper printed with

hexagonal grid is all you need to de-

gas, called nebulas, A typical nebula stretches for dozens of light-years
and contains only a few more parti-
cles per cubic meter than the hard vacuum of interplanetary space.
Nebulas come in two varieties: dark and bright. A dark nebula is made up of cold, drifting gas and dust. Bright nebulas possess brilliant stars that burn inside the cloud and give off illumination. Both dark and bright nebulas are important because of their roles as stellar nurseries, the birthplaces of new stars.
In addition to the physical phenomena of a sector, you also need to describe the inhabitants of that area.

Scale

pict the key locations in the sector Which of the dozens or hundreds of

Do you want humanity's place in the universe to consist of a few dozen stars within 10 or 20 light-years of Earth? Do you want a true galactic empire spanning thousands of lightyears? Or is something in between those extremes more appropriate?
CAMPAIGN TABLE GS7: STARFARING Scatz describes the basic choices available to you. The labels in the "Size" column are simple descriptive terms with no specific meaning in the context of the game rules; what's most important aze the numbers in the other three columns.
For instance, a sector the size of cluster measures around 100 lightyears from edge to edge and con-
Three Dimensions tains roughly 5,000 stars. To depict
this sector on a normal-sized piece of hex-grid paper, a map scale of 5 light-years per hex is recommended. Ot course, that piece of paper won't contain specific locations for each of those 5,000 stars. Even a thoroughly developed sector probably has only 40 or 50 star systems described in detail, so what you're really doing when you set a scale is determining the number of unknown, unexplored, or insignificant star systems be-

you're designing. (You can use a piece of graph paper with a square grid if you prefer that style of map.) Remember, it's not your job {o identi-
fy every star in your campaign terri-
tory; even a province-sized sector (see Table G57) can contain dozens of stars that have no importance in the story you want to tell, and as such they don't need to be placed on your map. If your map encompasses an entire arm of the galaxy, you'll have to assume that there are thousands of unmarked stars in each and every square on your map.
Stars shouldn't occur at equally spaced distances across your map: that would be boring and unrealistic. Clump a few stars together in one or more areas of the map, and leave large tracts between those clumps where few stars exist. These empty stretches are sometimes called riffs. Rifts may represent areas of the cosmos in which all significant astronomical bodies were incinerated by ancient supernovas; they can be areas of mystery for heroes to explore, or perhaps they can serve as borders between different stellar em-
pires in the sector,
While stars are the most obvious

tween the sites of interest in your
190game.

sites of interest in a sector, space also includes vast clouds of dust and

stars marked on your map are homes to life-bearing worlds? How are these systems organized? Do they have interstellar governments or empires, or are they a disjointed collection of independent planets?
In campaigns in which FTL travel is impossible, expensive, or unreliable, interstellar governments are unlikely at best; each star system would exist as an isolated state. Faster-than-light travel and communication make it possible for star systems separated by the gulf of interstellar space to be controlled by a central government.

Mapping

in

Unlike @ map of a planetary surface, a sector map must represent threedimensional space. Rendering such an area on a two-dimensional sheet of paper presents a few challenges. However. there are a few tricks for
showing which stars are "above" or
"below" the level surface of your mapsheet.
First, assume that a horizontal plane bisects your sector--this is the two-dimensional area defined by the mapsheet. One or more of the stars you place on the map should be located on this plane, so that it serves

ilnexc g Tyears|

as a base reference point. If one of
the star systems in your sector is

or down reference is Goldmine,
located on the plane of this map.)

STAR SYSTEMS

more important than the others, or if

To get a rough (sometimes very

Each of the countless points of light

one system happens to be centrally located within the sector, it would make sense to locate the horizontal plane so that it runs direclly through that star. Next to any star that this

rough) estimate of the distance be tween two stellar bodies, simply add

in the sky is a star system, and each system is an island of matter, energy,

the horizontal distance to the overall vertical distance and take two-thirds of that total. For instance, the hori-

and possibly life in the great dark void of interstellar space. If you run an interstellar campaign, you may

plane does not pass through, you'll zontal distance between Hogan's need o describe a dozen or more star

jot down information that shows its.
location in the third dimension--its
distance above or below the plane.

Goat ("79") and Sheboygan (" 212") is 11 hexes. The overall vertical distance is 9+12, or 21. So, the distance

systems; if you run an interplanetary
campaign, you'll need to sketch out just one:

The sample sector map on this

between the two stars is two-thirds The size and age of a star dictate

page (representing a portion of «

of 11+21=32--approximately 22

how likely it is to have planets, the

cluster-sized sector) demonstrates an
effective way to map three-dimensional spaces. On this map, most stars have designations such as

hexes, or about 110 light-years. 1f both stellar bodies lie on the
same side of the horizontal plane for example, Blackmast (" 76") and

habitability of those planets, and the
resources or phenomena associated
with that system

Number of Stars "A1" and *v2." The " A" signifies a

Fort Sam Houston (" 74")}--calculate

stellar body that's located above the the overall vertical distance by sub-

horizontal plane that runs through tracting the smaller number from the A great number of star systems are

the star that happens to fall at the

larger. Thus, the vertical distance be- actually binary systems--two stars,

center of the map. The "7" signifies tween Blackmast and Fort Sam

each orbiting around the other. Bina:

astellar body that's located below Houston is 2 (6-4=2) rather than 10, 1y systems and even more complex

the horizontal plane. The number

This system merely approximates multiple-star systems comprise more

next to the symbol denotes the actu- three-dimensional distances. Fora than half of the star systems in the

al distance, in hexes, that a stellar truly accurate calculation, use the

universe

body hangs (above or below) the hor- Pythagorean theorem (a?+bi=c?) for

Binaries, trinaries, and other exot

izontal plane. Thus, Rajah (" 74") is 4 each axis. Additionally, you can use ic aangements are certainly inter

hexes (or 20 light-years, according to computer software to plot your sector esting, but in reality these systems

the map's scale) below the horizontal in detail, or construct a model of @ pose significant barriers to human

plane. (The only star without an up

191 sector and suspend the stars by wire. colonization. Planets formed in a bi-

= nary or multiple-star system often possess climates and temperatures antithetical to human life.

b

In general, aliens with extremely

unusual biochemistries--those ca-

pable of surviving in conditions of

extreme heat or unendurable cold--

stand the greatest chance of being

primary fuel (hydrogen) may start burning helium. This causes it to swell drastically in volume and burn brighter than its temperature would normally indicate. Scientists call
these stars red giants.
Planets that are habitable, as humans define the term, rarely exist ex-

distort time and space, further reducing the chances of any surviving planetary matter. Because a black hole drags nearby matter toward and into its maw, such objects are often surrounded by swirling clouds of cosmic debris known as accretion
disks.

ARCHITECTURE CAMPAIGH

able to colonize such worlds. Hu-

ceptin Class F, G, and K systems.

mans living in these systems must

The hotter stars (O, B, and A) are too

remain in shielded stations or other antificial environments, such as hollowed-out asteroids or domed cities

large, hot, and active to support Earthlike worlds unless such a world is extremely distant from its parent

Of course, this is science fiction, so you can throw a scattering of

star. In addition, O, B, and A stars burn for only ten or twenty million

human-tolerable worlds among your `maultiple-star systems if it suits you.

years--and it took hundreds of times longer than that for multicellular life

To determine the number of stars in a particular system, roll d20 and

to develop on Earth. Of course, explorers and colonists may be able to

refer to TABLE G5B: STARS IN A SYSTEM settle on such worlds when they do

You can always reroll (or choose the exist, unconcerned with the failure of

Bodies as massive as good-sized asteroids or planetesimals may be slowly spiraling to their doom ina black hole's orbit, but heroes still might visit the vicinity for some reason or another. A long stay, however, is very unhealthy, since black holes give off vast amounts of deadly radiation. It has been theorized that a vessel with sufficient shielding could pass through a black hole and end up in an entirely different part of the universe, or another universe.

number of stars yourself) if the result clashes with your concept of the star system.

native life o develop or the star's fate millions of years in the future.
On the other end of the scale,

Neutron stars form when large stars exhaust their fuel, but don't collapse completely. Al the remaining

Class M stars (red dwarfs) put out

matter compresses into a tiny body

only a fraction of the solar energy

only a few kilometers across. The

necessary to support life at an orbit
anywhere near Earth's, so an Earth-

material's density crushes its atoms, resulting in an object composed en-

like world would have to orbit much tirely of neutrons. A neutron star may

closer to the star. Also, many red

be surrounded by the blasted rem-

dwarfs are so-called "flare stars," subject to violent instabilities that

nants of a planetary system. How-
ever, worlds of this sort would be

could make close-orbiting planets cold, lifeless, virtually lightless, and

dangerous places to visit.

bombarded by scathing amounts of

The stellar components of a bina- hard radiation. Pulsars are rotating

ry or multiple-star system don't al-

neutron stars that also cast out a

ways match in spectral class. For

massive volume of radiation.

example, the Centauri star system,

White dwarfs are stars that don't

Sol's nearest neighbor, consists of

have sufficient mass to collapse into

three stars: Alpha Centauri A, Alpha neutron stars. Such a body is small,

Spectral Class

Centauri B, and Proxima Centauri. dense, and ringed by the wreckage The first two bodies are class G stars ofits planetary system. A white

The most important characteristic of fairly comparable to Sol. Proxima, dwarf system would be cold and

astar is its mass. A star's mass de-

`however, is a red dwarf that orbits its dark, since the star doesn't put out

termines the temperature at which it companion stars at an immense dis- much light or other energy.

burns, the likelihood of planets in its tance. When the stars in a multiple

Black dwarfs are small stars that

system, the habitability of those

system are of different sizes, the

simply burn out after exhausting

planets, and the lifespan of the en-

largest one is dominant and is re-

their fuel. When this exhaustion oc-

tire system. Very large stars burn

ferred to as the primary (see TABLE curs (a rare event, since any small

much hotter than Earth's medium- `GBO: MutTpLE-S1AR SYSTEMS).

star will burn dozens or hundreds of

sized Sol and exhaust their nuclear fuel much faster. Small stars burn cooler and conserve their fuel.

Non-Main Sequence
Some of the most unusual stars are

times longer than our own Sun), all that's left is a cooling cinder. A cold and dark planetary system may cir-

The lemperature at which a star

non-main sequence bodies. In other cle the remnants of the dead star.

burns determines its color, or spec-

words, they don't fit the typical mod-

Brown dwarfs are unlike the ofher

tral class. Most stars belong to one of els of mass and temperature.

non-main sequence bodies--they're

the classifications along the main

Black holes (lso known as collap- stars that never quite formed, rather

sequence: O, B, A, F, G, K, M. Class O sars) are the remnants of very large than stars that ignited and later

stars are the hottest and brightest, stars that have exhausted their hy-

burned out or exploded. In order fora

while Class M stars are the coolest drogen fuel and exploded in a super- ball of gas to become a star, it must

and dimmest. However, certain

nova. This explosion makes it

have a sufficiently great mass in

events in the life of a star may cause unlikely that any significant plane- order to generate the temperatures

192it to deviate from the main sequence. tary system survives around the star. For example, a star that exhausts its In addition, black holes have such incredibly strong gravity that they

necessary to ignite and sustain the tusion reaction that makes a star
blaze. If a body never ignites, it be-

DSetvaelropinSgystema

The two tables on this page provide

Blue-white
Blue Green
Yellow
Orange TMM Red

the most basic details about a star
system: the type of stax(s) in the system, the number of planets in the
system. and a general statement
concerning how far away those planets orbit from their parent star. If
planets exist in a system, you'll want

Non-main sequence sta;

1o record their locations relative to

each other and their parent star.

Black hole Neutran star White dwarf
Black dwarf Brown dwarf Red supergiant

At the end of this book you'll find a System Record Form, designed to summarize the critical information
about a star system at a glance.
Record the name and spectral class of the system's parent star at the top of the form. The form includes a se-

: MuLtipL

ries of rings; each of these indicates an orbit that a planet might occupy

econdary) Planets

0 or B (white dwarf]

di2-9

Bor A (M)

ai2-g

F (6]

di2-8

F (K or M)

a1e-7

F (brown dwarf)

di2-7

6 (6]

d12-7

6 (K or M) 6 (brown dwarf)

d12-6 di2-7

K (K or M)

ai2-8

K (brown dwarf)

a12-7

m

For systems with more than two stars, generate
a binary pair and a single star (3 stars), two nary pairs (4 stars), two binaries and a single (5

around the star.
In addition to affecting the number of planets present, the spectral class of the star also influences where planets are likely to form. this TapLE GBL: ORBIT TRACKS reflects fact. All the possible orbit tracks where a planet could be located are depicted on the System Record Form, along with enough blank lines to record information about each planetas its location is determined.
When creating a new star system, it's easiest to begin with the inner-
most planets and work outward.
Each of the marked orbit rings on the System Record Form may or may not

stars), or three ary pairs [6 stars].
< is the number of planets in the system. If a produ es the highest possible number, roll again and add the second res t to the first (only rerall once, even if the second roll also yields the highest possible number). On the first roll, any result of O or less (a roll of 6 on d12-7, for example) indicates the absence of planets. o ra sts which of the columns to reference on Tanie G61: Orair TRACKs (page 195) to establish how far away
planets are fram their parent star.

have a planet (or some other body) at that distance from the star. As you work outward, there's a 50% chance that each particular orbit ring contains one of the planets in your system. Keep working outward until you assign each planet an orbit, until you run out of orbit tracks, or until the comet belt comes up as a planet type. Ignore any leftover planets.
# Example: Dave is creating a

single-star system centered on a

comes a smoldering brown dwarf, giving off heat and possibly a little light. Brown dwarls are hard to detect, since they're dim and small. A traveler would have to pass within a few million kilometers of one in
order to notice it.
Red supergiants are spectacular, but short-lived, stars. When a star of average size such as Sol exhausts its store of hydrogen, it begins to burn the helium and other heavier elements manufactured during its eons

of hydrogen fusion. This causes the star to cool and swell to a tremendous girth. A red supergiant swallows any inner planets it may have possessed and renders the rest of the system uninhabitably hot, then lasts thereafter for only a few million years before exhausting its fuel and becoming a supernova, with a result-
ing cataclysmic explosion that anni-
hilates anything within a radius of several light-years.

class G star. Table G5 tells him that the star has d12-2 planets. He rolls d12 and gets the highest possible resuli--12. This means that there are at least 10 planets (12~ 2), and he rolls d12 again. His roll of 3 gives him 1 more planet (3-2=1), for a total of as many as 11 planets in this system.
Relerring to Table G59 again, he sees that this star will have a Type II orbit arrangement. He proceeds to first `TasLE: G61: ORBIT TRACKS and
193 checks to see if @ planet exists on
Ring 1, which is 0.3 AU from the star.

After deciding that "heads" means Using the Tables

p--

"yes," he tosses a coin. It comes up
heads, so one of Dave's 11 planets is

located on Ring 1. On the first blank

line under "Orbil," he writes the or-

bital distance (0.3).

He moves to Ring 2 (orbital dis-

tance 0.4). He flips the coin again,

and this time it comes up tails--no

planet. The coin indicates a planet

for Ring 3, so Dave writes "0.7" on the

second blank line under "Orbit." He

has now placed two planets out of a

11. maximum of ARCHITECTURE

As it turns out, Dave places only

five planets before he generates a

comet belt at Ring 10 (orbital dis-

tance 15.0). That represents the outer

limit of the star system, so he disre-

gards the fact that he had more plan-

he CAMPAIGN ets he could have placed. Now

moves on to the next step in system

generation, whichis ...

The three tables on the facing page

enable you to determine the basic

characteristics of a single planstary

system (consisting of a planet and its

moons, if any). Refer first to the "Planet Type" column on Tasiz G61:

ORarr TRACKS. Each entry in that col-

umn lists a die to roll. Make the roll,

adjust the result by the number

given, and consult the "Die Result*

G2: The column on TasLE

PLANETS.

process is summarized in the notes

accompanying the tables, and described in detail below.

® Example: In the system Dave is

developing, the first planet is on

Ring 1. According to the right-hand

column of TABLE GB1: ORBIT TRACKS,

Dave should use d6-3 to determine

the planet type. The die roll is 4, yielding a result of 1. Dave checks

the TaBLE G62: PLANETS and sees that

first planet in his system is a hot

PLANETS

super Terran.

While stars inspire awe, they're only
of passing interest to the typical
group of explorers. Most heroes opt to explore the challenging and sometimes bizarre environments offered by planets. In a starfaring campaign, you may need to build up a portfolio of a dozen or more well-developed planets and thumbnail sketches of dozens of less interesting worlds. These planets form the background for your heroes' adventures.
In the system generation proce-
dure being outlined here, planet's distance from its patent star is the

In addition, the table indicates
that this planet has d6-8 moons. Dave rolls a 6 this time, yielding result of 3 moons. After noting that this planet's moon modifier is -1, he goes to TABLE GB3: Moons. He rolls
2d6 three times, getting results of 8,
8,and 5. Subtracting 1 from each die roll produces final results of 7,7, and 4.Two of the moons are ring systems, and the remaining moon is small. This moon is oo diminutive to keep much in the way of an atmosphere,
50 Dave determines that it's simply
an airless, hot, inradiated rock.

Sub-Terran Planets
Rocky or stony bodies significantly
smaller than Earth, sub-Terran worlds may support life. In the Sol
system, Mercury and Pluto qualify as
sub-Terran bodies, as do most of the
moons orbiting the various planets. A hot sub-Terran planet is a small,
dense world close to its parent star.
Such bodies tend to be rich in heavy
minerals--the solar wind carries off

major factor in determining what type of body it is.

Types of Planets

`many lighter elements--but have little or no atmosphere. Many hot

The size and temperature of the parent star governs the range of the star's habitability zone. This is the approximate distance at which a planet receives the solar energy necessary for life (in whatever form).
The habitability zone of a hot star is much farther away from the star than the habitability zone of & cool
star, If the Earth's parent star were a
blue giant instead of a relatively

Plants display a wide variety of orbital characteristics, elemental composition, appearance, and evolution. The information that follows details the bodies and phenomena that heroic spacefarers might encounter
as they explore a star system. You
can adapt the general principles behind these planetary types, or ignore them in favor of your own design.

sub-Terran planets are tide-locked--
the star's gravity has slowed the
plamet's rotation to a standstill, so that one side bakes in continual daylight while the other freézes in unending night.
Cold sub-Terran planets are often mineral-poor; they form on the outer fringes of a system, where heavy elements are scarce. Since these bodies are small and not very dense, their

small yellow star, and its orbit was
at the same distance, the enormous
energy output of the star would turn the planet into an irradiated wasteland resembling Mercury or Venus. On the other hand, if Earth orbited « red dwarf at the same distance, the
dearth of energy from the parent star
104would make the planet a frigid ball, much like Uranus or Pluto.

Ring Systems
Ating system is the wreckage of satellite that was destroyed by the tidal influence of a nearby larger body. The rings are primarily made up of very small particles of matter
(gas and dust), possibly held in a coherent shape by the gravity of larger
asteroidlike bodies interspersed
throughout the gas and dust.

gravitational pull can only capture @ thin atmosphere. Many of the larger moons of outer gas giants qualify as cold sub-Terran planets.
Super-Terran Planets
Super-Terran planets are metallic or rocky bodies significantly larger than Earth. They easily retain atmospheres due to their strong gravity.

TABLE G61: OrRBIT TRACKS

2& =3

Planet Tau5pe i
)

CoNOUsWN
55.0

a4a.3

da+a

d6:a

5 2d6+6

2.0 2d6+6

3.0 =2da+0

5.0 2da+10

10.0 d8.10

15.0 dB:10

20.0 d6:12

30.0 d6+12

40.0 dBa2

10.0

50.0 d8:12

Ring: An orbital track on the System Record Form. 0.7, 1.0, 1.5, etc.: The distance of that ring from the primary star, in astronomical units (AU). For example, Ring 5 in a system with a Tupe Il orbit track is located at 0.7 AU. Planet Type: Roll the die indicated and refer to Taste 662: PLaners [below) to determine the planet's type.

TABLE GE2: PLANETS

Type Ring system Super-Terran, hot Sub-Terran Terran, hot Terran, temperate Sub-Terran, temperate Super-Terran, temperate Asteroid belt Gas giant Gas giant, small Super-Terran, cold Terran, cold Sub-Terran, cald Comet bett

Moons None da6-3 daa-3 da6-a a6-2
d6-3 a8-3 None 2daiz a2 a6 aa a3

Moon
Modifier WA E -5 -3 -3

Type defines the planetary body. Moans indicates the number of moons the bady possesses. A result less than 1 indicates an absence of moons around this planet. Far each moon that exists, roll once on TasLe 663: Moovs (below). Moon Modifier lists a nodifier that applies to the 2d6 roll made on Taste G63: Moons.

TABLE G6G3: Moons

Tupe Tiny Small Ring system Sub-Terran Terran Super-Terran

A moon has the same temperature as its parent planet. (Consider gas giants to be cold-- but see the text at right for an exception.)

= A hot super-Terran might possess
an atmosphere composed of relatively heavy elements such as sulfur and

oxygen. The planet is probably in a molten state due to its proximity to

b

the parent star, which makes it an unlikely candidate to be a life-bear-

ing world, A cold super-Terran retains lighter

gases such as hydrogen and methane. Such a world could conceivably
rota- NOIHdWED
support life--especially if its

tion was rapid enough to partially

offset the planet's crushing gravity.

Terran Planets

These worlds are roughly Earthlike

in size and composition. Naturally,

bodies of this type are the most like

ly to develop life as we know it. In

worlds Earth's solar system, Terran

THNLD3LIHIYY

include Venus and Mars. Under the

right conditions, either one of these

planets could develop into life-bear-

ing worlds.

A Terran world has enough gravi-

ty to retain a relatively dense atmos-

phere--although the vagaries of its

composition and the planet's proximity to the sun dictate just how this at-
mosphere evolves as the planet ages.

Gas Giants
These are planets composed primarily of light gases--hydrogen, helium, methane, and ammonia--in various quantities and states. These bodies tend to form where large amounts of light gases accumulate early in the development of a solar system. Gas giants frequently gather a number of rocky or metallic moons and some
rings--though most of the moons are
nothing more than tiny, captured asteroids.
Gas giants tend to be cold, poisonous, violent, and practically bottomless. There's no solid surface to land on for thousands of kilometers, and at the depths at which a liquid ocean or solid core could exist, the atmosphere exerts indescribable pressure. Even if a protected human could survive the atmospheric pressure, the crushing gravity would kill
While gas giants are completely inhospitable to human life, their moons may support life. A gas giant
orbiting close to its parent star--
from 1 to § AU, for example--may possess moons close enough to Earth in size and composition to foster life. These Terran or sub-Terran satellites are generally temperate.

1 Asteroid Belts ey, stony, or metallic rocks may cir-
» cle a star, Unlike a ring system, an asteroid belt is made up entirely of

in diameter. A comet's tail forms when material evaporates from the comet as it passes close to its parent star. Comets have distant and ex-

boulder, mountain-, and moon-sized tremely elliptical orbits, sometimes

bodies. The concentration of these taking thousands of years to travel

objects is relatively dense compared one complete circuit back to the in-

to the emptiness of space, but the

ner regions of system

distance between adjacent asteroids

is still considerable; even a large

Moons

spaceship could easily navigate

Planetary satellites vary widely in

through most asteroid belts without size and composition. Tiny moons

coming close to a collision.

are 50 to 200 kilometers in diameter,

ARCHITECTURE

The largest asteroids are only a

usually asymmetrical and far too

couple of hundred kilometers in di- small to retain any kind of atmos-

`ameter--ar too small to retain at-

phere. Small moons range up to 2,000

mospheres or to have any significant kilometers in diameter and may

gravitational fields. These bodies

have trace atmospheres. Sub-Terran

are excellent sources of nickel, iron, moons are large enough to be plan-

carbonaceous compounds, water,

ets in their own right; in Earth's solar

CAMPAIGH and other minerals that are scarce in system, the four large moons of

the outer reaches of a system.

Jupiter (Ganymede, lo, Europa, and

Most individual asteroids weave Callisto), Saturn's satellite Titan, and

complicated orbital paths within the our own Luna fall into the sub-Terran

confines of a belt; sometimes, the in- category. Terran and super-Terran

fluence of a nearby planet may pull moons are correspondingly larger.

them away from their companions. If a moon is large enough to posFor instance, some of Jupiter's outer sess an atmosphere, it may support

moons are probably captured aster- life--if the moon's parent planet isn't

oids,

too close to its star. A large moon

Some asteroids have highly ellip- with a heavy atmosphere (Titan, for tical orbits that may result in colli- example) may have an intolerably

sions with inner planets from time to hot or cold climate. time. The so-called "dinosaur killer" In order for an Earthlike world to

impact 65 million years ago on Earth exist in orbit around a gas giant, the

may have been caused by an aster- gas giant must orbit somewhere in

oid of this type.

the star's habitability zone. In addi-

Comet Belts

n, the Earthlike moon would probably need to orbit the gas giant at

Present around almost every star,

substantial distance to minimize the

comets are composed of rock and

planet's destructive tidal effects.

water, or ammonia ice, and they're

rarely more than a few dozen miles

Orbital
Characteristics
Not all star systems look alike. The first planet around one star might be amolten inferno only a few million kilometers from its sun, while the rst planet around another star might be a frozen ball of ice circling
billions of kilometers away. Defining a realistic sel of orbital characteris-
tics can involve the use of a lot of hard science. Do the planets in a system follow an elliptical or a circular orbit? What's the length of the year and the axial tilt for each planet? How fast do the planets rotate? Generally, you can use your imagination to create the details of a system and its particular planets. However,
knowledge of some basic astronomi-
cal concepts can add depth and real-
ism to your campaign--qualities
that most roleplayers value greatly

Length of Year
A planet located close to its star travels faster in its orbit and makes one circuit around the star more quickly than a planet located farther away. In our solar system, the length of planet's year varies from about 30 days for Mercury to almost 250 years for Pluto. In one Earth year, our planet travels about 940 million kilome-

ters in its journey around the Sun,

while Venus travels more than 1 bil-

lion kilometers
time.

in the same

length

of

From a gaming standpoint, the outer planets in a system don't move any appreciable distance in the
course of a typical adventure--even

196

one that takes weeks or months to complete. However, inner planets

The axial tilt of a planet governs the seasonal variation of its weather.

can move a significant distance in even a relatively small period of time. I it's important to know how far
away two inner planets are from one another at a given time, see "Plane-
tary Alignment" on page 156 in Chapter 11: Spaceships for advice on how to make this determination.

The Earth's north pole is inclined
away from the sun during winter in
the northern hemisphore, and as result that half of the planet receives less light and less heat than it does in the summer. A planet with an ex-
treme axial tilt will have severe dif-
ferences in seasons--extremely hot
summers and extremely cold win-

Eccentricity The orbits of some bodies in a star

ters--while one with a mild axial tilt
will have little variation from one

system may be exactly or almost ex- season to another.

actly circular; most of the planets in our system have this characteristic, and are said o have orbits of low eccentricity. Other orbits--such as those of many comets--are greatly

Length of Day
As a result of their formation, most Dodies in space spin on an axis. The velocity of this spin dictates the

elongated ellipses. A world with a

length of a planet's day. Without ro-

highly eccentric orbit would be much tation, one side of a planet would

closer to its sun during particular times of the year and farther away

eventually superheat from an endless stream of daylight, while the

during others. The temperature and other side would freeze in eternal

the length of the seasons on such a

darkness.

world would vary markedly during
the course of a year.

Relative to Earth's 24-hour period of rotation, a planet's day might be extremely short (Jupiter rotates once

Inclination

every 11 hours) or extremely long

The orbits of most satellites--includ- (Venus rotates once every 243 days).

ing moons revolving around planets, as well as planets revolving around stars--lie along or very close to the

When a planet or moon orbits toa close to its parent star or planet, it eventually becomes tide-locked. The

plane that passes through the equa- satellite's rotation is halted by the

tor of the body they're orbiting. Sci- pull of the larger body's gravity, and

entists call this the ecliptic plane. If you viewed a typical star system from the side, you'd see the planets

it circles with the same face always
turned toward its primary. Earth's own Moon is an example of a tide-

were aligned horizontally, with no

locked satellite.

real difference in "elevation" above

or below the rest of the system. However, some bodies may break
this rule. For example, Pluto's orbit

Planetary Environments

slants off the ecliptic plane, so that it
sometimes hangs "above" the other planets and sometimes "below" them, Comets and asteroids often
have inclined orbits, too.
Axial Tilt
While arbital inclination deals with the revolution of a planet in relation tothe ecliptic plane, axial tilt deals
with a planet's rotation in relation to
the ecliptic plane, If a planet's ecliptic plane is exactly aligned with the
\ecliptic plane of its star, then the `planet has an axial tilt of 0°. Howsver, the two ecliptic planes don't necessarily line up: in our solar system, Mercury is the only planet with an axial tilt of 0°. The plane of the Earth's equator (and therefore, the line of its axis) is tilted about 23° from the plane of its orbit.

Now that all the bodies in your sys-
tem have been identified, it's time to get down to details about what it's
like on or near the surface of each of
the system's planets.
A full discussion of planetary environments ranges through a lot of topics, but at the heart of the issue is one fundamental question: Is the `planet in question suitable as a home for life? Specifically, can heroes walk about unprotected, can
they survive and be comfortable
while wearing only respirators, or do they have to be decked out in fully secled protective suits? Can life as
`we know it evolve on the world? If
not, is it capable of supporting some
kind of weird biochemistry? Just because a planet is of an ap-
propriate size and orbits at a favor-

= able distance from its star doesn't
mean that it automatically spawns life. The geological chemistry of a

world is crucial in determining the quality of its atmosphere, the effect

b

of that atmosphere on temperature

and habitability, and the presence of free water and free oxygen.
Planetology is an involved field of

study, and it's not necessary to ex-

the plain the reactions necessary for

HOIBAHYD

development of an Earthlike environ-

`ment. For game purposes, the end re-

sult is what matters. The overall habitability of planets
and other stellar bodies is summa-

rized in the five planetary classes

described below. By using these cat-

egories in conjunction with the GRAPH system (described in Chap-

ter 3: Gamemasters in Action), you

THNLIILINDHY

can draw a fairly complete picture of

a planet's total environment.

TABLE GB4: PLANETARY ENVIRONMENTS
provides a system for randomly de-

termining the general physical char-

acteristics of a planet. i you prefer,

you can read through the descrip-

tions that follow and make your own. decision about what kind of environ-

ment a certain planet represents.

Class 1
Planets and moons with Class 1 en-
vironments require characters to take few, if any, protective measures in order to survive; the raw materials
`needed to support life exist in abundant supply. Some conditions might
modify the environment to an extent
(axctic cold at the poles, an atmos-
`phere denser than Earth normal, and so forth) have little effect on the overall habitability of these worlds. For instance, it's possible for a Class | warld to have a toxic atmosphere--
but the toxic element would be mere-
ly amild irritant, or would only be
present at certain altitudes or in par-
ticular areas. Of the planet types listed on Table
G4, the three temperate worlds are the most likely to be Class 1 environ`ments. A hot world (if it isn't t00 hot) can be a Class 1 locale, as could a cold planet.
Class 2 Unprotected humans exposed to Class 2 environment will die over the course of days, hours, or even minutes. However, special equip`ment offers protection against the
197 `harmful effects of a Class 2 environ-
ment. Special insulated or refrigerat-

=

TABLE GB4: PLANETARY ENVIRONMENTS

b

Temperate worlds

Life Ocean

Class 4 GI/RA/A0/PO/HO

Cass 3 GIUR2/AIPIHA

Hot worlds 1-3 Cass
Class

Life Ocean GURI/AQ/POMHS GURIAIPIHS

Cass 3 GIR2/AA/PZ/HI

Class GI/RZ/AIPR/HA

Class 3 GUR/AIPRHI

Class GURVAIP2HA

Class 3 GURE/AVP2HI Class 2 GURVARP2H3

Class GR/R2/AIPIHI Class G2/RIAR/PRMHI

Class 2 GR/RVAR/P2/HI

Class G2/R2/AZ/PIH2

Class 1 G2/RVARPIHI

Class 1 GR/RVAZ/PAMHA

Class 1 GE/RVA2/PI/HI

ARCHITECTURE

Class 1 G2/RVA2/PIH2

13-13 Class 2 GIRVAIPIHA 15-16 Class 3 GI/RB/AG/PA/HS

Class 1 G2/RVUAZPAH2

17+ Class 5 GA/RVAG/PSHS

Class 1 G2/RVAZPIH2

Class 1 G2/RVAIVPIH2

Cold worlds

Class 2 GIMVARPAHI Class 2 GIRDAR/PAHI Class 3 GIRZ/AI/PIHE
CAMPRIGH
Class GA/RVAI/PIHA Class GA/RO/AVPAMHI

Class 4 Class 3 Class 2 Class 2 Class 2

G/RIAC/POHO GUR2/AI/PIHO GIR2/AIPIHO GR/RVAIPR/HI G2/RVAZ/PI/HI

s Class 5 GS/RIAVPSHO Class 3 GA/RVAVPSHO Class 3 GA/RVAIPAHO Cass 3 GA/RIAR/PAHO Class 3 G4/RUAZ/PAMI

Cass 1 G2/RIAR/PIHR Cass 2 G2/RUAR/PAHI Class 2 GIRVAVPAHI Class 2 GIRVAVPAHO Class 3 GA/RVAIVPAHO Class 3 GARVAIPAHO I, IV

atTFycoeGLperriearcfTalneesl:esa]r.nIrfa,:aSrnrIaeofeplepalpllaarTdpnenaiis2eoeeit;ntenseftitGo.sarEccnS8saadu:enppeasLhembiTarFl-aevaeTlselrioeoegrofrrGamcasse6nusa5sp.n:,psOo,rnrocttalesiln,argdnorislo2l.nl+lao8tfdi;v2dfe08orttloihflaaedtr, geafteeanrlglmesansitnwregyitihaehninnetvsre,tihroerlonislmgltsidevn1etht2ne+try5app.na:gsesibinledicates

ed suits can negate the effect of ex-
treme temperatures, respirators take
care of imperfect or thin atmospheres, and so on. Many places on Earth blur the line between Class 1 and Class 2 environments--or example, the peaks of the highest mountains, the poles, or the worst desert conditions. As noted above, these localized deviations wouldn't change the fact that Earth is in broad terms a Class 1 environment.
Class 2 environments are most often found on cold worlds, but a proportion of hot and temperate planets may fall into this category. Settlers can establish homesteads in these areas, but it's a struggle to find the necessities of life. For example, colonists on Mars would require a pressurized, heated dwelling and a source of water and oxygen.
Class 3
This type of environment is basically
198incompatible with unprotected human existence. Extensive life sup-

port is required even for shor visits. Most Class 3 environments have several deadly characteristics, so that a number of lile-support systems (respiration, temperature control, etc.) are required
On Earth, the bottom of the ocean and the inside of an active volcano are examples of a Class 3 environment. Any planet that possesses an atmosphere could be the home of a Class 3 environment (airless worlds are considered separately in Class 4, below). Establishing a large human
settlement in a Class 3 environment
probably isn't possible, although huhans could build permanent stations or facilities in these areas.
Class 4 A Class 4 environment is open to space, with no atmosphere, very little (if any) gravity, and no temperature regulation. To survive in space or on the surface of an airless world, a person would have to bring everything he or she needs--including

food, water, shelter, and air. Explorers might build space stations or
mining outposts in Class 4 environ-
ments, but no one would attempt to colonize these areas.
Any planet type that has little or no atmosphere qualifies as a Class 4 environment--which rules out only gas giants and super-Terran worlds as possible Class 4 sites.
Class 5 These environmenls are beyond the pale of human experience. Deep inside the atmosphere of a gas giant, the incandescent plasma of a star's corona, o the molten interior of an Earthlike planet are examples of Class 5 environments. Unless the characters make rigorous preparations with highly specialized gear, they don't have a chance of surviving an encounter with a Class 5 locale-- and some of these environments are simply lethal no matter how much protection a character might have,

DESIGNING

natives wouldn't necessarily be oxygen breathers, and they would have

PLANETS
The environment class and GRAPH 1atings of a planet provide only the

to be able to tolerate temperatures
higher them the boiling point of
water.

most basic information about the world; they represent the extent of the facts scientists can garner from long-distance observation. When a survey team enters orbit for a closer

Torrid, Temperate, and Frigid Worlds
For worlds of these types (H3, H2, H1),
all of which are more or less Earth-
like in composition, the details of

look, the explorers can unearth more details about the physical structure

oceanic and atmospheric makeup are quite variable.

and chemical cycles of the planet. This level of analysis, called planetology, uses many sciences--including chemistry, oceanography, and climatology--to determine the life-

» A toxic (A8) atmosphere on
worlds of these types may include heavy concentrations of chlorine or fluorine, carbon dioxide, or hydrogen cyanide.

bearing potential of a planet.

» A corrosive (A4) or super corro-

= world on which they exist. The pres-
ence of a liquid ocean requires an at`mosphere; liquids boil off in a vacuum. Many planets with atmos-
b
pheres possess such free-standing
liquid bodies. On a world that's nei-
ther extremely hot or extremely cold,
oceans moderate the planet's temperature and climate, acting as a
massive heat reservoir. Depending
on a planet's temperature, an ocean HOIYAHYD
may or may not be composed of water; a planet like Mercury might
have oceans of liquid lead. fin, or
iron compounds.
» An inferno (HS) or super torrid (H4) planet may have oceans or seas
of molten sulfur, tin, rock, or iron
compounds.

sive (AS) atmosphere may include

» A torrid (HB) or temperate (H2)

Physical Chemistry

strong concentrations of sulfuric, car`bonic, nitric, or hydrochloric acid.
» An inert (A1) atmosphere may

planet may have seas of water, or ni- JUNLIILIAILG
tric, sulfuric, or hydrochloric acid. » A frigid (H1) planet may have

This science concerns itself with the

contain a large amount of neon or

seas of water or a water-ammonia

elemental composition of planetary argon, or free nitrogen. Methane or

mixture. Extensive portions of the

bodies. Although each planet has a

ammonia may dominate on colder

ocean's surface may be frozen.

unique chemical makeup, worlds

worlds.

» An absolute zero (HO) planet

with similar environmental charac-

may have frozen seas of ammonia,

teristics contain similar elements.

Torrid, temperate, and frigid temper- hydrocarbons, or water.

Inferno and Super Torrid Worlds

ature bands are favorable for the development of life. Both carbon-based TaBLE G6S5: OCEANS determines the exlifeforms end, on cool planets, life- tent of a planet's oceans according to

A planet with an HS or H4 designa- forms that breathe sulfur compounds the environment class of the planet.

tion is generally rocky or metallic. Its close proximity o its star prohibits

may exist on worlds with these envi-
ronmental characteristics,

Roll d8 and cross-reference the result with the planet's environment class.

the presence of an atmosphere--un-

Sparse oceans are small, land-

less the planet is very large or pos- Absplute Zero Worlds

locked seas or frozen ice caps, cover-

sesses unusually heavy elements Often referred to as "dirty snow-

ing about one-quarter of the plant.

(carbon dioxide, neon, or sulfur diox- balls," these are made of ice mixed These bodies are small and shallow,

ide, for example). Lighter gases are with a variety of other substances

vulnerable to climatic shits, and

very likely to have been blown away such as ammonia, methane, or car- offer little insulation against plane-

from the planet during its primary star's formation.

bonaceous rocky compounds. Pluto is a good example of an absolute

tary temperature shifts.
Moderate oceans are large, land-

zero world.

locked seas or extensive ice caps

» A foxic (A3) atmosphere on an

Some absolute zero worlds may that cover roughly hal the planet.

inferno or super torrid world is made support hydrogen-breathing life in

Moderate oceans are extensive

of metallic vapor such as iron car-

hydrocarbon seas. However, life is

enough to alter the planet's climate

bonyl, or possibly some form of sulfur compound.

unlikely to exist at temperatures that pattern and can withstand major cli-

approach absolute zero.

matic shifts.

» A corrosive (A4) or super corro-
sive (AS) atmosphere on an inferno or Gas Giants

Abundant oceans cover most of the planets surface, dividing the

super torrid world may be made of

Typically useful as sources of hydro- continents from each other. Earth is.

sulfuric acid or carbonic acid. » A dense (P4) atmosphere may

gen, gas giants may possess heavier an example of a planet with abungases, such as nitrogen or oxygen, dant oceans.

include water vapor, carbon dioxide, that "sink" to a lower level within the

Complete oceans cover the planet,

orneon.

planet's gaseous envelope, stratify- with only a few islands rising above

» Acrushing (PS) atmosphere on ing like a parfait. Explorers might an inferno or super torrid world indi- find indigenous life on a small gas

the waves, Convection from the
equatorial to the polar regions will

cates a Venuslike environment, with giant with a structure of this sort.

exert a strong equalizing influence

@ mantle of carbon dioxide.

on the planet's climate.

Life may exist on an inferno world,
though such life wouldn't be carbon-
based. A super torrid-world could have carbon-based lifeforms, but the

Oceanography
The science of oceanography is the study of the composition of oceanic
bodies and their interaction with the

Many scientists consider a thalassogen, an ocean-forming compound, to be a requirement for any kind of
199 life. Water appears to be the most
prolific thalassogen, but ammonia

could also have the necessary quali-

Y-
p

ties to engender life. Other possible thalassogens are molten sulfur, sulfuric acid, hydrogen fluoride, and

iron carbonyl. Of course, worlds with

large amounts of these elements

aren't suitable for unassisted human

habitation.

TABLE GES: Oceans

Class 2 -2

Class 3
1-a
5-6

Climatology
This science is the study of a planet's climate--all the variations of tem-
ARCHITECTURE perature, precipitation, wind veloci-
ty, and general habitability that might occur on a planet's surface. A planet's climate is a measure of the violence or extremity of its weather patterns.
Sometimes, generally uninhabitCAMPAIGN able worlds contain areas in which
the climate differs greatly from the planetary norm. For example, a planet with a crushing or toxic atmosphere might have a small, habitable area on its mountain peaks, while a frozen world might have a narrow band of habitable territory at the equator
the `TaBLE G66: CLIMATE determines severity of a planet's climate accord ing to the environment class of the planet. Roll d8 and cross-reference the result with the planet's environment class. (Class 4 worlds are not considered because a planet with no atmosphere can't have a climate; Class planets are disregarded because the environment is so brutal that climate is irrelevant.)
» Note: Add 1 to the die roll if the planet has sparse oceans or no oceans, and add an additional 3 if
the planet is a gas giant. If you've
decided that the planet has an extreme axial tilt or a fast rotation rate, add 1 for each of those conditions that applies. If the planet has a mild axial tilt or a slow rotation rate, subtract | for each of those conditions.
A calm climate is placid by Earth standards, with little variation. Storms are infrequent, winds are gentle, and the seasons aren't very pronounced. A planet with a calm climate has fairly uniform and predictable temperatures. If Earth had less severe axial tilt or a slower rotation rate, its climate might fall into this category.
An active climate is similar to what we experience on Earth: distinct seasons, intense winds and
200storms, and a surface temperature that fluctuates by as much as 100° C

TABLE GEG: CLIMATE

Class 2

Class 3

Severity Calm
Active Turbulent
Violent

from the coldest time of year to the hottest.
A turbulent climate is somewhat more vigorous than an active one, with @ wider range of temperatures and more powerful storms and winds. Mars has a turbulent climate; its dust storms can last months or years, and its polar caps virtually disappear during summer. Humans need special protection when visiting or settling on a planet with this kind of climate.
Aviolent climate has an even more drastic temperature range, constant storms, and destructive winds. The atmosphere of a Class 3 gas giant almost always falls into this classification Even if a planet with this type of climate is otherwise habitable, its weather patterns may make colonization virtually impossible. Saturn and Neptune are examples of worlds with violent climates; scientists have noted wind velocities in excess of 1,500 kph in their clouds.

a TaLE G67: LANDFORMS to determine planet's general landscape. Roll d8 and cross-reference the result with the planet's environment class.
» Note: Disregard the issue of landforms for a gas giant (which has 10 land). If the planet has one or
more moons or if it's a sub-Terran
world, add 1 to the die roll for each of those conditions that applies. If the
Mapping a Planet

How convoluted is a planet's surface? Is its crust broken into tectonic plates, or is it fused into one solid mass? How many of its physical fea-
tures are the result of meteor im-
pacts and collisions with other bodies? Questions of this sort are answered as part of the study of a planet's geology.
You can sculpt the landscape of your worlds as you desire. However, not everyone has the lime necessary to map out a full geological blueprint of every planet. You can use

TaBLE G6E7: LANDFORMS

=

Class 2

Class 3
1-3

Profile

b

Smooth
Varied Rugged
Perilous

planet is a super-Terran, o if it has a corrosive (Ad) or super corrosive (AS) atmosphere, subtract | for each of those conditions that applies.
Smooth landiorms indicate a geo. logical landscape less pronounced than Earth's. A planet with smooth landforms has fairly low and flat mountains, shallow seas, and dearth of spectacular geological formations (like the Grand Canyon). In addition, these planets don't have much volcanic activity. Venus is an
example of a planet with smooth
landforms. `The category of varied landforms
describes a range about the same as. Earth's, with active plate tectoni and @ moderate amount of volcanism. Earth's highest mountains rise

almost 10,000 meters above sea level, and its deepest ocean trenches are roughly 11,000 to 12,000 meters below sea level.
Rugged landforms are significant-
Iy more exaggerated than Earth's. Unusually light gravity leads to higher and sheerer mountains and peaks. On very massive worlds, « 1apid rotation rate may offset heavy gravity enough to allow the formation of high mountains. The planet's
crust may or may not feature tectonic plates. Major asteroid or meteor im-
pacts may create features even more extreme than those created by normal volcanism. Mars is a planet with rugged landiorms.
Perilous landforms are even more pronounced than rugged landforms.

tidal ROIbWED
Very light gravity or extreme
forces may seriously deform a plan et's crust, allowing all kinds of dra matic buckling and sheer terrain Perilous landforms may provide ac cess to a planet's interior or may feature a mountain that extends miles above the rest of the world's surfac:

Life

THNLIILIADLY

One of the most fascinating aspects of science fiction roleplaying is the possibility of interacting with alien life forms. As discussed earlier, the frequency of alien encounters depends entirely on the type of campaign you wish to run. The following
information contains suggestions on
populating your universe with life.

Generally, the environment class

and characteristics of each randomly

p generated planet dictate what series, or biochemical type, of life might evolve there. The "Life" column on TABLE G64: PLANETARY ENVIRONMENTS lists one or two series of life that

Oxygen Hydrogen

might exist on a planet of a certain
type. To randomly determine the chance of life on a planet that's capable of supporting life, refer to the appropriate line(s) on TABLE G68: LiFe-

Carbon Carbon Silicone

Chlorine

Sulfur trioxide 1-2

Oxygen

]

Sulfur dioxide 1

FoRMS and roll d8. If the result falls

ARCHITECTURE CAMPRIGH

within the range given in the "Odds" column, then the planet does contain lifeforms belonging to the series in
question.
Just as with other steps in this process, you can skip the random determination and simply dictate that life exists on a planet if that's what you want to happen.

Higher Life

)

I a life-bearing world has matured

past the primordial stage, almost

any type of life might exist. For ex-

ample, Earth's diverse biosphere in-

cludes everything from ash trees to

zebras. If you looked at these two or-

ganisms from afar, you'd see very

little to indicate that they shared the

In addition, you can always introduce new orders of life, or drastically expand the roles of existing ones. Take a look at some of the branches that have died out in Earth's evolutionary tree. Trilobites, armored fish, and dinosaurs are organisms that had their day and died ofi--but what i they hadn't? New orders might in-

Primordial Life
Before advanced civilizations can
develop on a planet, the lifeforms on the planet must evolve from their beginnings as extremely simple organisms. For example, during most of Earth's history, the planet was covered with nothing more advanced than organic goo. Algae and primitive one-celled microbes were the only lifeforms present. If a party of space explorers happened to visit during this period, they wouldn't have seen anything more than the potential for higher life.
It you prefer random determination, assume a 75% chance (1-6 on d8) that life on a planet is too simple t0 be anything more than scientifically interesting to a typical group of heroes. They land, take some readings and perhaps some samples, scrape the mud off their boots, and take off again--end of adventure!
You can, of course, ignore this die roll and fill any planet you like with highly evolved life. Or you can set up a story situation that transiorms the presence of primordial sludge
into an exciting adventure. For ex-
ample, the heroes could land on a primordial world only to discover that an alien species is genetically tinkering with the world's evolution, Perhaps these aliens are merely curious, or perhaps they have more nefarious designs. Either way, the heroes would have to deal with the possibly horrifying results of the aliens' experimentation before con-
20fronting the interloping extraterrestrials themselves.

same world. However, their relation- clude species of living balloons,

ship is clear on the cellular level, since all Earth-based life shares

land-going echinoderms, or anything else you might think of.

some basic biochemical and genetic 1 you're thinking about creating a

properties.

number of alien creatures for a sub-

A planet's biosphere could include stantially alien ecosystem, research

millions of species. You probably

basic biology--there's a lot of weird

don't have time to delve that deeply into the creation of so many lifeforms--but you don't have to. As-

stuff on Earth that might provide some good departure points for populating your alien world. Remember,

sume that a planet conlaining higher you're interested in Earth analogues

lifeforms has diversity equivalent to here, creatures that fit into roles and

that on Earth unless you specifically descriptions roughly equivalent to decide otherwise. In other words, the animals that live on Earth.

planet has photosynthesizing plants. Finally, you might describe a

that range from algae to grasses and planet on which life is possible in

trees, simple filter-feeding animals analogous to corals and sponges, herbivores of various sizes and

some places but impossible in others. A good example would be Earth in the Cambrian period (about

shapes, and carivorous creatures. You might consider making some
universal changes to this Earthlike

500 million years ago), when all animal life swam in the ocean because 10 land-dwelling animals had yet

world--changes that will help your developed. What if life on a particuplayers see their heroes as explorers lar planet existed only in valleys, on on a strange planet. For example, mountaintops, or along narrow equa-

Earth plants are green because of

torial bands? Perhaps life on this

the chlorophyll they contain--but the world enters long periods of hiberna-

vegetation on a different planet

tion due to climatic extremes. What-

could run through the entire spec-

ever you decide, the result is sure to

trum of colors. A few purple and

convey an alien "feel" to your world.

striped plants go a long way toward

defining an alien setting.

Organizing Lifeforms

Another universal change you

When heroes explore a new planet,

could employ is the elimination of

you dont have to concern yoursel

certain classes or orders of life. For with every new lifeform that crosses

example, what if trees never evolved their path. Describe those that fall

on the planet? Or fish? Maybe the

into one of five general categories:

world's largest plants are rambling

» Aggressive carnivores or scav-

shrubs or tough, tall grasses. Maybe engers.

mollusks and arthropods diversified > Aggressive herbivores that acand evolved into a great number of tively defend themselves from per-

free-swimming species.

ceived threats.

» Plants and animals with passive defense mechanisms that may prove dangerous.
» Pests, vermin, or parasites that
may attack through blind instinct.
» Creatures of scientific interest or with unusual properties.
Basically, if a creature isn't going to
attack the heroes and doesn't pos-
sess anything useful, you don't have to spend hours (or even minutes) detailing it. Alien rabbitoids or small grozers function only as part of the scenery. Of course, don't let your players know that these are unimportant creatures--let them think that anything on the planet might prove dangerous or significant to their heroes.
Intelligent Life
The guideline for the presence of intelligent life on any planet you're describing for your campaign is simple: Put it there if you want. However, intelligent life shouldn't exist just anywhere in your game setting. When a science fiction writer includes intelligent aliens in his story, he does so deliberately, with a specific purpose in mind. You should do the same. Unless you know why an intelligent species exists and what
kind of interaction the heroes might have with it, don't put it into your
campaign. It's important to note that intelli-
gence doesn't necessarily imply technological advancement or civilization. Imagine a world where solitary camivores, such as tigers or
bears, have risen 1o sentience. They
wouldn't need to develp tools, because their natural weapons function quite well against their prey. Nor would they need to develop social skills such as language or organization. However, they could be
brilliant hunters, trackers, or fighters as individuals.
A small selection of alien life-
forms appears in Chapter 17: Creatures & Aliens. These creatures aren`t presented as universal "monsters" for the heroes to fight--although you can use them that way if you like.
They're intended to provide a model
for you to follow when you make up aliens for your own campaign.

CREATING CIVILIZATIONS
Now that you've detailed your star

= are presented with an existing soci-
ety with which to interact--a colony,
a trading post, a spaceport, even a
major city. Heroes may undertake all kinds of adventures in and among b

systems and the planets contained

humans or humanlike aliens, rang-

within them, you can begin creating ing from corporate espionage to out-

the civilizations and cultures that

right warfare. Alternatively, a human

make up your universe. Like other

civilization may serve as @ haven in

aspects of campaign design, you

the campaign universe, a place

should feel free to utilize the sugges- where the heroes can rest and recu-

tions and information contained

perate from adventures elsewhere. HIBdMED

below, or modify them to reflect the When you design such a human-cre-

realities of your setting.

ated or human-led society, you

Begin the design of a civilization, culture, or society by considering the

should consider its Progress Level, Civilization Level, Law Level, cul-

following basic questions:

ture, and economy.

> What do the people eat? What

Progress Level do they wear? What kind of shelter
do they use?

> What is the physical geography Chapter 9: Goods & Services in the JUNLIILIDLY

of their homeland?

Player's Handbook describes Prog-

> What are the primary industries 1ess Levels, which measure a re-

or resources of the world, nation, or gion's or society's technological

outpost?

development. A campaign using a

» How much contact do the peo- contemporary selting might be

ple of this society have with other

based on Progress Level 4 or 5, while

nations or worlds?

the baseline for a science fiction

> What is the primary form of gov- campaign will usually be PL 6 or

ernment?

higher.

» How much leisure time do people have, and what do they do with it? What do they consider art?
> Which characteristics are valued by the members of the culture? Which ones do they abhor?
» How strong are the forces of law and order? Does the government enjoy popular support?
> Who are the enemies of the state or world?
» What is the role of the heroes in their home state, world, or society? How much wealth, authority, and social clout do they wield? Don't be afraid to let your players do

However, a science fiction setting doesn't always require superior tech-
nology. An alternate history or uture Earth campaign might place the he10es in a world of postholocaust savagery. Similazly, many people live in societies where high technology exists, but is not widely available. In a futuristic starfaring campaign, un spoiled or undiscovered planets might exist whose technological advancements lag behind the Progress Levels of the capital worlds.
A colony, outpost, or civilization on another planet is likely to have a Progress Level of at least 6, since the humans on this world must have

some of this brainstorming! If a play- used space flight to get there. Some-

er wants to run a mercenary from the
planet Urzog, ask him to sketch out

times, a colony might regress to a
state of near savagery due to disas-

some historical and cultural aspects ter, warlare, or disease, but a Prog-

of Urzog. You can always modify the
player's ideas in order to fit the

ress Level lower than 3 would be unusual.

world into your setting, but in many

Some colonies may voluntarily es-

cases the best worlds and cultures

chew technology, preferring a sim-

arise from the joint effort of two or

pler way of life for religious or

more creative people.

philosophical reasons. Again, PL 3 or 4would be about as low as modem

Human Civilization

`humans could tolerate, even in a pastoral world.
1i the planet in question is ex-

`Whether or not a planet has its own tremely hostile to human life (say. @

native biosphere, humans may es-

Class 3 or a harsh Class 2 world), the

a0 tablish their own bases and outposts Progress Level couldn't fall lower
there. On such a world, the heroes than 6. This would represent the min-

14imum level of technology necessary CL 4: Nation

to maintain human existence under

Several large cities or colonies, with

p these conditions.

extensive infrastructure and independent manufacturing, exist on the

Civilization Level
Civilization Level (CL) is a rough measurement of the extent to which a world has been settled, and a
gauge of its amount of resources.

planet. The world produces most of what it needs, and may even export refined or finished goods to other planets. The population may be as high as 1 to 10 million, and no penalty applies to an attempt to locate re-

This is the second characteristic of a sources. human civilization that you should

consider during the design phase. CL 5: Continent

ARCHITECTURE

A number of large cities, or seyeral

CL O: Uninhabited
On a world at this CL, no settlements
or installations presently exist. The ruined remains of a temporary sur-

nations, exist on the planet, which has a total population of about 100 `million. Almost all significant industries are present, and the world is

vey camp or an unmanned science station would represent the extent of CAMPRIGH human enterprise on the planet. No special resources are available; any skill check a hero might make to lo-

self-sufficient. Unusual materials or resources are easy o locate (-1 bonus), and several excellent spaceport facilities exist on the planet.

cate or discover such materials will automatically fail.

CL 6: World
Several continents are settled, with

`hundreds of large cities. The total

CL 1: Unique
Only one small to moderate human settlement or outpost exists on the planet. A solitary mining post, a
`manned science station, or a small
colony with apopulation of 1,000 or less is in this category. Resources

population is roughly 1 billion. Extensive industrial capacity allows major export trade, and @ number of excellent spaceports may be available. Very few resources or materials out of reach; heroes receive a2 bo-
nus when attempting to locate un-

are very limited; a +3 penalty ap-

usual or rare materials.

plies to all skill checks involving a

search for specific equipment, parts, CL 7: improved World

materials, or specialists.

Several continents possess dense

CL 2: Scattered
A handul of small setilements or outposts exist on the world, separated by vast unexplored or unsettled stretches. A young but growing colony falls into this category, as well as aworld with widespread mining operations and a number of mining posts. Population is roughly 10,000. Resources are limited, so heroes have a +2 penalty to locate unusual materials.

settlements, and minor colonies may have been developed in arclic, aquatic, or near-orbit locations to in-
crease the planet's capacity. The
population is roughly 10 billion, and
any native civilizations or ecosys-
tems are largely overshadowed by a `human presence. A minimum Pro ress Level of § is necessary to maintain this Civilization Level. Charac-
ters get a -3 bonus when attempting
to locate usual or rare materials.

CL 3: City The planet contains one large settle-
ment or several good-sized ones. The
total population exceeds 100,000. Modest spaceport facilities may be available. Resources may be ra-
tioned or expensive, but are usually available. Some heavy industry is
possible. A +1 penalty applies to all
skill checks involving the location of unusual materials.
204

CL 8: Megapolitan
World
All continents are densely settled, and extensive submarine and orbital habitats also exist. Worlds of this level possess productive industry of all kinds. Native ecosystems are virtually nonexistent. Colossal spaceport facilities are the norm, and the population may range as high as 25 or 50 billion. A minimum Progress
Level of 6 is necessary to maintain
this civilization. Resources are plentiful (-4 bonus).

Law Level
No matter where or whien your campaign is set, the forces of law and order have a role to play. Heroes natwrally find themselves dealing with criminals and other unsavory elements. In addition, some heroes may canry unregistered firearms, break laws in pursuit of villains, and even
rebel against authority. A knowledge
of the relative levels of law and order is essential when fleshing out a world or system. Such information adds a layer of color and detail to the setting and may even impact on
the heroes' actions.
Law Level describes a civilization's government in terms of its de-
gree of organization and the extent
of the power it wields. One unique characteristic of each level is a modiier (bonus or penalty) that applies when heroes attempt illegal acts. Failure indicates that local law officials notice the attempt, Incarceration or corporal punishment isn't automatic in such cases--but this could be the consequence of a Critical Failure. Even then, you shouldn't let a die roll change the course of the story completely. Feel free to ignore or modity any results you deem detrimental to the plot. Reverse this modifier, from a bonus to a penalty
or vice versa, if the heroes try to
make use of a local law agency to conduct an investigation or interfere with a criminal's activities.
Different settlements, cities, and
nations around a world can have different Law Levels. As a general rule, alarge civilization (CL 3 or higher) must have a Law Level equal to or greater than its Civilization Level, or else the society falls into anarchy.
LL D: Anarchy
No law exists in system or world with this classification--except the law of the jungle. This rating is generally very rare, since true anazchy is almost completely foreign to the human experience; even criminal organizations usually agree to abide by some kind of law. The modifier for this Law Level is 4.
LL 1: Tribal No universal rules of conduct exist at this level, although local groups may develop extensive codes of right and wrong. The burden of securing justice falls on the wronged individual, who is usually free to take any ac-

tion he thinks appropriate. The modifier for this Law Level is -3.
LL 2: Feudal The law exists to serve individuals in power. The local lord, satrap, crime boss, or big shot exercises authority only to defend his or her own
position, or when a complaint makes
it worth getting involved. While the local lord enjoys totalitarian power, the law extends only as far as his reach, Corruption is rife at this level.
Justice tends to be either nonexistent
or extreme, depending on who's pulling the strings. The modifier is -2.
LL 3: Civic Communities agree to basic standard of conduct, elementary civil rights, and some police organization beyond the big shot's personal legbreakers. The reach of the law is still limited, and offenders who get out of
town can usually escape justice.
Corruption presents a serious problem. The modifier is -1.

---_
b
HOIbdWED JUNLIILINDLY

LL 4: State

A number of communities share com-

mon laws and enforcement agencies.

Within towns and cities, the legal

Human strength versus t'sa speed

authorities enjoy a reasonable range of powers and restrictions to protect individuals. Corruption is modest, but the elite still enjoy different standards from the common masses. There is no modifier for illegal action or interaction with legal authorities.

LL 7: Technocracy
Authorities use extensive surveil-
lance, propaganda, and mind control without consideration of civil rights. Police are present in every home and place of business by means of spies or electronic monitoring. This is the

which the heroes attempt to use or avoid the forces of law, or to challenge scenes in which the heroes use skills such as Investigate. Culture

highest Law Level tolexable to hu-

What are the human inhabitants of

LL 5: National
The United States of the 1990s falls into this category. Except for minor details, all communities agree on the powers of police, the rights of the victims and the accused, and the exwadition of criminals. Specialized

mans, and it represents an unnatural this planet like? Why are they here,

subjugation of the individual to the and what are they trying to make of

state. Governments are likely to re- the world? Usually, residents of

program criminals through surgical colonies and research outposts ad-

or psychological means. The modii-
eris +3.

here to the culture, language, and norms of whatever world they came from. Over the course of generations,

law organizations handle certain
areas of criminal activity. Authorities can hold a dangerous individual for atime, but must eventually charge the individual with some crime. The Law Level supplies a +1 modifier.

LL 8: Nenhuman The inhabitants are, by design or by nature, incapable of crime, and they support the efforts of any authority
without reservation. A few alien so-
cieties might fall into this category.

their values and behavior may drift 1i you've decided that humans exist on a random planet, you should consider where they came from and why they left that earlier location.
Sometimes, people found colonies

LL 6: Totalitarian

The modifier is +4.

specifically to experiment with a
new social organization or a particu-

The authorities may use or disregard
civil rights as they see fit, and they can place suspicious individuals under continuous surveillance. Courts and military authorities can order arrests or searches. While corruption exists, bribes and graft must be approached with the greatest delicacy. Unsanctioned violence is dealt with harshly. The modifier is +2.

Using Law Level It's not necessary to make a sweep-
ing statement that your entire uni-
verse is sel at a specific Law Level In frontier regions, the forces of law aren't as powerful and usually exist ata lower level than in core homeworlds or major cities. You can apply the modifiers o encounter scenes in

lar culture, or to support a certain be-

lief or practice. T! aclassic plot

device of science fiction, with plenty of adventure possibilities. Use your imagination, but make sure that the

situation you present will somehow

threaten the heroes or demand ac-

tion on the heroes' part to set it

straight

203

=
p

ARCHITECTURE CAMPRIGH

Economy
Most people don't make a living from adventuring, exploring, or investi-
gating. Rather, they use their skills
to carve out a living for themselves
in the mundane world (or galaxy). Despite their extraordinary adven tures, even heroes must bow to the economic realities of the universe. Thus, it is important for you to flesh
out (at least in part) the economic systems of your setting. Despite
what you may think, this process doesn't require an advanced degree
in macroeconomics. All you need is a
loose outline that considers the fol lowing aspects of an economic sys-
tem: currency, resources, and supply
and demand
Currency What does your setting use as a me-
dium of exchange? Money is a universal substitute for bartered goods.
i you're a shoemaker, you don't have to carry the shoes you've made with You every time you go shopping, in the hope of working a swap; you can sell your shoes for cash, take that cash someplace, and exchange it for whatever you need. In order for currency to be viable, both the seller and the buyer must agree that it has
206value.

The simplest form of currency is

For example, an agrarian nation

materials that are valuable in and of or world exports food, but needs to

themselves. Gold coins are tangible, import manufactured goods such as

usable wealth. Gemstones, crystals, tractors and combines. If you know

power packs, and even ammunition that most people on this planet sub-

can serve as basic commodities of

on automated farming, you've in

exchange, especially in areas where stantly got an image of wide-open

stable currency is hard to find

fields broken by robot silos and stor.

In most contemporary or near-fu- age facilities. On the other hand, a

ture campaigns, it's probable that

world that exports radioactive ores

some universally recognized form of must feature extensive mines and

cash, maybe currency made of paper processing plants.

or plastic, is the favored means of

exchange. More technologically ad Supply and Demand

vanced worlds might use debit cards One rule that isn't likely to change in

or credit counters of some kind as

the future is the law of supply and

replacement for currency. A person demand. Plentiful and accessible

could wire these counters to his bank

goods are cheap; rare and hard-to

account or "buy" a card of a certain make goods aren't. Of course, there's

value each time he gets paid. These also a big difference between sub-

cards can be personalized to a single sistence items and luxury items.

user. A paranoid government might Starving people will generally buy

insist on building recorders or trans- food before they purchase a TV.

mitters into a credcard or into the

Designing a few trade routes can

skin of its citizens, so it can monitor

be helpiul for a campaign in which

all transactions

economics plays a significant role. I

Planet A, an industrial world, pro-

Resources

duces agricultural machinery for

Itisn't necessary or desirable to set Planet B, then a ship can take trac-

up a complete economy for an entire tors from A to B and retumn carrying

setting. However, an understanding food from B to A, reaping a small

of a world's general economic situa: profit on both ends of the trip. You

tion will often give you a clearer pic- can even create a network or web of

ture of s cultural and technological trade routes, adding depth and real

background.

ism to your imaginary game setting

Cities and Towns tion (a power plant room for space

While there might be an entire world aut there to explore, even the most vi-
sionary characters won't interface
with an entire planet at one time. So, to finish the job of detailing a civilization for your heroes, you may

stations)
» Life support facilities (oxygen and water storage tanks, heating and cooling machinery)
» Defense systems (small arms
lockers, armories, gun turrets or mis-

need to sketch out some quick de-

scriptions of the cities, towns, or in-

stallations of that planet. Acily contains lots of people liv-
ing close together. Try to think up two or three supporting characters for

» Living quarters and lavatories » Common areas (lounges, dining 100ms, conference rooms) » Food preparation and storage

each particular city the heroes might
visit. Players generally think in terms of a location's usefulness. For instance, if one town has a spaceport and the next'town over is a mining camp, you've got two distinctive sites the heroes will want to explore when,
they visit the planet.

{acilities » Communications and surveil-
lance (radio rooms, radar stations,
security posts)
» Offices, laboratories, or work-
spaces > Emergency facilities (lifepods.
escape hatches, firefighting gear)

It's not strictly necessary to map
outa city or town in any detail, unless you enjoy drawing maps. What you want to do is answer five basic questions about the community and

» Industrial machinery and control systems (an assembly line, auto-
mated mining or terraforming
devices)
» Entertainment facilities

record those answers, either on a

sketched map or in some kind of notebook:
» Where will the heroes sleep? > Where will they eat and drink? » Where can they buy equipment, including weapons and ammo? » Where are the bad guys? > Where are the local law enforcers? Ą Are there any special facilities or structures, and if so, where?

Remember, an outpost is just an
empty shell without memorable supporting characters. If the heroes are
using a mining station as the home
base for their explorations, take
`some time to populate the installation with contacts or rivals. An isolat-
ed colony or station is small town in and of itself, so treat it as such during the design phase.

It you do choose to sketch out a map, Alien

ascale of 20 to 100 meters per hex for Civilizations

a@small town o outpost is fairly reasonable. For a good-sized city, you
`may need to map at 200 to 400 meters
per hex.

One of the pitfalls of many works of science fiction is a tendency to create aliens with human motivations and human emotions. This sort of alien

Stations and

may be fine for shoot-'em-up space opera, but if you're trying to design

Installations
Outposts in hostile areas aren't likeIy 1o be spread out in isolated build-
ings. Each structure will possess a
degree of defensibility and self-sutficiency. You usually don't need to sketch out every detail of a base or building meter by meter; you only need to do this when you're planning on setting a combat-heavy adventure
in that facility.

something really new, you'll have to use your imagination.
You could use Progress Level, Civilization Level, and Law Level to describe the basic characteristics of an alien civilization. However, these
terms may not be accurate for a truly
unique alien society. Aliens may have entirely different notions of organization, settlement. or government from those possessed by the `humans in your campaign. Its help-

Here's a short list of items you may
want to include when mapping out a

ful to consider several basic ques-
tions about any alien population you

station of some kind:
» Access (airlock, main gates) Ą Power generation and distribu-

place on a planet: > What do they want from the he-
roes, o from humans in general?

= » What don't they want the heroes
to tind out about or take from them?

» How are they organized? Who

will interact with the heroes? > What are their settlements or

b

ships like?

> What are the other features of their technology?

> What do they look like? What

are their game statistics? When they

fight, what are they trying to do--kill,

capture, or drive off the heroes?

HIBAKYD

» Why are these aliens in your

campaign?

Designing Mixed

Civilizations

Humans and aliens often share plan-

ets in classic science fiction. In fact,

humans might share a planet with a

basic number of alien species. As a

JUNLIALIHDHY

guideline, the sum of human and

alien Civilization Levels shouldn't

exceed 10, reflecting the fact that it

one species has filled up a planet, there isn't much room for anyone else to settle.

# Example: Dave has created the

planet Daybreak, inhabited by a

large number of native tribes. He de-

cides that the alien Civilization Lev-

el is 5, since the aliens have settled

most of a continent. The human min-

ing colonies located on Daybreak

probably shouldn't have a Civiliza-

tion Level of more than §, since this

would start to seriously crowd the natives. For one side to grow, the

other must suffer. Of course, the hu-

`mans could presently have only a

small settlement. In this case, both
sides still have room to grow.

The Finishing
Touches
Regardless what kind of planet, city, ot area you're describing, remember to be creative. Look for opportunities to wow your players with cities and sites that are every bit as memorable as the villains and the story.
`The rules and information contained in this chapter function as a quideline for the creation of an exciting, three-dimensional campaign. Utilize or modify anything in this chapter to reflect the unique flavor of your own imagination. The goal is to create a setting where both you and your players have fun.

a1

SPONTANEOUS

ture, the idea should tie in to the trig- other character you think will pla gor, but you won't build solid plot pivotal role in the adventure, ds

ADVENTURES

around your idea (although you can that character using the full chas jot down a few notes concerning pos- ter generation rules. Less important,

Designing a spontaneous adventure dossnt take long; all you need are a

sible developments along the way). Let he plotdevelop as the players'

or one-time-use characters (such as hired muscle or professional ex-

lSW notes to-get the story under way. heroes interact with the story.

perts), need to be described only in

Afler that. you improvise inreqction

terms of those statistic

6 the decisions of your playe: Running spontaneous adventure

Background

st quite so easy s designing it

Once you have an idea. you need to

Ą6i have to think fast to keep the

develop a background--the events

come into play. For example, hired muscle needs statistic ach as durability ratings, combat and defensive skill scores, and armor ar

slory going every time your players thatled up to the opening scene.

rdlmda wha theirheroes will do. To fiels you thiough thot thinking proess, you have o foundation of information-to-fall bock on--a foundation consisting of a-story idea, its hack:

Abackground can be as simple or complex as you feel necessary. It can
suggest the diraction of the adven-
ture or the way certain scenes play out It also provides the story's driv-

weapon information. Experts just
need skill scores related to their area of expertise. You can sum up many
supporting cast members with ˘
single descriptive sentence and po: sibly a single skill score. Of cour

ground. « supporting cast, and the
rigger that got the adventure start 68, Each of theso elements is ex-

ingForce and impetus. In this way, i the heroes decide fo interact with a the background leads tothe trigger, lesser character, you may have to justas thetrigger leads to the adven: make up details on the but spot,

iplained below: after you read the

ture that follows. You can't control that's okay. Just build upon what you

lentire section, you'll have a clear plgtue of how they fit together

thestory decisions of the players {amd you really shouldn't try o), but

do know about the character and ad-
just to meet the current needs of the

youdo have total control of the back- story,

. The Story Idea
fThe Besic idea behind your story can foome from anywherea favorite

ground. The more details you build into-the background, the more you'll
have to draw irom as the adventure
unfolds.

Book ormmovie.a player's suggestion,

Chapter 6: Supporting Cas tains information about assigning
game statistics to minor and major supporting cast members. You can
use the templates in that chapter to

Bvents in previous adventures, the
daily news, teci-world b

Supporting Cast

quickly generate certain types of premade characters for use in your

even situations suggested by every-
day life. You nieed to give your ideaa

Any adventure you design needs to adventur have a supporting cast of characters.

have science fiction spin (if it doesn't

At least one of these characters must

that already) to make it fit within ˘

have a connection to the back-

The Trigger

`contines of your campaign Az idea can range from o simple
imagser concept to full-blown

ground; the others can appear in the
story as the adventure progresses.
Villains, alliss, opponents, experts,

An idea,

support and background,

ing cast make up most of the founde

tion upon which an adventure i

story. Ttcan center around a problem innocent bystanders, disinterested built. The only thing you're missing

ithe hieroes must solve, a foe they

third peirties, even crazed creatures Is the trigger--the ground-breaking

must confront, a new bit of technolo: gy they mustfind o retrieve, or an Interesting location they must visit

ternifying the countryside can be supporting cast characters, depending on the scope of the adventure.

orexplore.In a spontaneous adven-

When you create a villain or some

moment that releases the adventure's potential and gets the story going.
Like other a s of adventure

209

= design, the trigger can consist of pages of detailed information or just a few simple notes. It depends on
b your basic adventure idea and the
opening scene you envision. No matter how simple or compli-
cated a trigger is, it must accomplish some important goals: set the mood and tone of the adventure, get the heroes involved in action right away, ac- EDESIGN
establish a setting in which the
tion takes place, introduce a supporting cast that provides opposition to the heroes, and force the players to make a decision about what their heroes will do.

Mood and Tone
Based on the environment and the
atmosphere in which it takes place, on the behavior of the supporting cast, and on the type of challenge it puts before the heroes, the trigger sets the mood and the tone of the adventure. An adventure intended to scare your players should have an atmosphere that projects a dark, deliberate mood, while an action-oriented adventure has a brisk, nonstop mood.
The trigger should also establish the tone of the adventure to come. A trigger with a light tone, populated by characters who snap off one-liners, is very different from a mysterious tone with characters using silence and strange actions to paint a nightmarish or surreal feeling
The tone of the trigger can be dictated by the adventure itself or by the genre of the campaign setting. The space opera, science fantasy, grim reality, postapocalyptic, and technothriller genres have certain conventions and attitudes that make them different from one another. Chapter 13: Campaign Design outlines some of the more popular science fiction genres you might want to use for your campaign.
Regardless of genre, individual adventures can sometimes break the mold to tell a specific story. Just be sure you carry the tone throughout, both in your descriptions of settings and action, and in the way you have the supporting cast talk and act.
Heroes in Action
Roleplaying games are about dra-
matic tension: Something exciting should occur during play. Sure, there are slow times, periods where players can catch their breath, but you
should never lose sight of the idea

that a roleplaying adventure is like a can keep him alive long enough to

movie or a novel. Every event should hear his tale.

advance the story in some manner,

Action in a combat scene is pretty

whether it's the adventure or the per straightforward--the action is the

sonal stories of the heroes. When the action looks like it's about to grind to

combat itsell. A trigger designed to provoke a combat scene could start

ahalt, it's up to the Gamemaster to

with an ambush, direct attack upon

keep it going.

the heroes, or a brawl in a public

The best way to keep the action

place. A threat of violence is often as

moving is to prepare a good adven good as violence itsel, since it pro

ture trigger. Your trigger should liter- vides a distinct possibility that com-

ally burst with action. Remember, bat will ensue. Bear in mind that the

however, that action doesn't neces- combat doesn't have to involve the

sarily involve combat. It does in

heroes. They could start out as wil-

volve contlict, though. Without

nesses to an attack or to the threat of

conflict--a complication or chal-

violence to another character.

lenge of some sort--you don't have

Action in an encounter scene can

action. Use the trigger to set up the

involve the conducting of tense ne-

initial conflict, then help guide your gotiations, or intexacting with the

players as their heroes act and react denizens of an underworld hangout,

to resolve the contlict.

trying o get information. Pure role-

Action in a challenge scene can

playing, with dice rolls thrown in

be achieved by the heroes receiving every so often to decide other char-

an encoded message timed fo seli- acters' moods and attitudes, can be

destruct, or the arrival of a mortally full of action--especially when the

wounded ally who has vital informa- stakes are high

tion for the heroes--provided they

PLANNED Setting
Obviously, every part of an adven-

ADVENTURES ture takes place in a certain location.

The setting of your trigger scene might help convey to your players the sort of adventure their heroes are getting into; a trigger that takes

A planned adventure is the tradition al approach to roleplaying. Designing a planned adventure requires

place in the middle of a riot on the
street suggests a different sort of ad-
venture from one that is set in a scientiic laboratory. Note, however, that "suggests" is a key word in that

you to develop a full outline of the
story you envision--though you still need to leave room for the players to perform. Remember, you set the events in motion, and your players

last sentence--every scene in your
adventure can have a different set

determine the way events play out.
The first steps in designing a

ting, and some of those settings

might have nothing in common.

Supporting Cast
As discussed earlier, a supporting cast is an essential element of any adventure. The supporting cast in your trigger might be composed of minor characters that will never be encountered again in the adventure. You could use the trigger to introduce the adventure's major villain (who, of course, makes an escape so he or she can reappear later). In some kinds of challenge scenes, the supporting cast--whatever provides opposition for the heroes--might be an inanimate object (a door that must be unlocked) or a situation (a chasm that must be crossed). No trigger is complete without some sort of supporting cast, whatever form it takes.

» Ide » Background:
» Supporting Cast: » The Trigger:

planned adventure are covered in
the "Spontaneous Adventures" sec-
tion. You need a basic story ided, @

<

background, a supporting cast, and a trigger to get the adventure rolling.

>

But that's not everything a planned

adventure contains. You also need 1o

develop a plotline that describes the

way the adventure will unfold

Plotline JHNLNINGE
An adventure plotline has similarities to the plotline of any novel, mo-

What Will They Do?
Finally, all triggers must provide the players with choices: What will the heroes do in response to the situation they re confronted with? An ad-
venture starts by presenting the
heroes with something to do. In general, "something to do
translates into story decisions. However you structure your trigger, the buildup should end with that most important question: What are your heroes going to do? How the players answer this question gets the game play under way.

After the Trigger

What happens after the trigger is entirely up o you and your players. You present the trigger scene, providing

aconflict and something for the he1085 to do; then you let the players

roleplay. How their heroes react and

the decisions they make should carry

the adventure forward in true group

storytelling style.

2

=
b
DESIGH
ADUENTURE

Far from home

tion picture, or television episode.
You're presenting the players with the initial idea and impetus of the tale, as well as the actions and reactions of the supporting cast and the environment of the setting. Your players provide the rest, as they use their heroes' actions to form an inter.
active tale--a group story.
A planned adventure isn't a rigid, linear story in which every event leads directly to another event. Although you can give your outline a linear structure for ease of use, let your players influence it through the
actions of their heroes. Because of
the nature of roleplaying--you usually can't predict what your players will decide to do next--your outline
a2 should be fluid and malleable. The

heroes should have the freedom to
go their own way, approach every
conflict as they see i, and follow their own instincts. In this way, they help shape the unfolding plot.
Acts
Build your plotline in the classic act
structure used in stage plays--this story form is a good model to follow in adventure design. Short, one-session adventures are played out in single act. Extended, epic-length ad-
ventures, requiring several sessions of game play, consist of three acts.
The one-act adventure doesn't have a complex, multilayered plot. It is a straightforward tale, with a minimum of locations, twists, and supporting cast members, These are

adventures in which the heroes know exactly what they need to do, and they go out and doit. For example, the sample adventure design outlined on the previous page has the makings of @ good one-session adventure. The heroes know they have to rescue Dr. Konn and return. her and her relic to the Academy-- it's just a matter of foiling the first
group of pirates, getting transport,
and avoiding the rest of the pirates during the journey to Covalt IV.
A three-act adventure can deal with more complex storylines, taking advantage of the larger scope of play. Think of the first act as the setup, where you introduce the basics of the plot (establish a mystery, present a problem, etc.), provide a goal, and let the heroes interact with situations that lead them toward the second act. Act two features encounters and obstacles as the heroes try toresolve the situation, as well as a variety of complications before the heroes can achieve their goal. Act three presents the climax and resolution of the story, pulling all the threads together for the conclusion.
With some more planning, the sample adventure design on the previous page could be turned into a three-act story. The first act would involve dealing with the events that lead from the trigger scene; the sec: ond act takes place during the journey to Covalt; and the third act plays out on Covalt as the heroes meet their final challenge prior to delivering the artifact to its destination. The three-act structure opens the door to more story possibilities; the Collec-
tor and the pirate leader, Captain
Talon, might not come on stage dur ing a straightiorward one-act adventure, but they might be pivotal characters in a longer and more complex plotline.
Scenes
Think of each act as a portion of the
story that has ils own beginning, middle, and end. The basic structure of an act contains three scenes, each of which can be either a challenge scene, a combat scene, or an encounter scene.
The beginning scene is the trigger that starts the action. The middle scene provides complications and obstacles. The final scene features the climax of the act, usually a minor resolution and a dramatic high note

» Alternate #1: > Alternate #2:

Alternates

b Sometimes the heroes go off in adi
rection that doesn't follow the outline

"r

you've prepared. That's okay; spon

taneity makes roleplaying games

fun, exciting, and unpredictable.

However, you can plan for some pos-

sible variations if your players stray.

Plan for two or three alternate paths

that you can eventually use to get

back to the main story.

Ii the players go in a direction that JHNLRINCL

takes them away from your original

idea, that's okay. You may need to

devise a follow-up scene quickly--

but that's not as difficult as it may

seem, as long as you have a strong HDISI0

sense of the story you're telling and

what sorts of opportunities for action

and challenges the story presents.

that pushes the heroes to the next act. This can be any complication that makes the heroes (and their players) want to see whal happens next. You can put the heroes in jeop ardy, ending on a cliffhanger: or you can have the heroes learn a crucial or emotionally moving piece of infor. mation--a clue that gets them on the tight track or sends them hurtling into the next scene.
Although an adventure can con tain as many acts and scenes as you need to tell your story, the basic structure of a three-act adventure looks like this: Act One
Scene One: Trigger Scene Two: Complications Scene Three: Minor Resolution
and Dramatic High Note Act Two
Scene One: Trigger Scene Two: Complications Scene Three: Minor Resolution
and Dramatic High Note Act Three
Scene One: Trigger Scene Two: Complications Scene Three: Major Resolution
and Climax Elements of Scenes To be sure that a scene contains all the necessary elements. just think of

it as an adventure in miniature and
realize that each scene has all the same elements that an adventure has: action, mood, setting, support-
ing cast, and a goal
The only one of these elements that wasn't discussed earlier, in the "Adventure Triggers" the section, is
goal. When you design a scene, you
should have in mind exactly what you want the heroes to accomplish before the scene ends. The goal of a challenge scene is to solve a prob
lem, circumvent an obstacle, or in
some other way overcome a chal lenge. In a combat scene, the goal is
to win the battle, escape, or other-
wise survive the scene relatively intact. In an encounter scene, the goal
can be more subtle. It could involve
gathering information, striking a bargain, making a purchase, tricking
a guard, or just interacting with new
characters.
How do you decide when a scene
ends? Obviously, if the scene has a
clear goal, then it ends when the he 10es achieve the goal. However, you need to make allowances for the possibility that the heroes might fail, or that their players might make story decisions thal send them off in a di ferent direction. In these cases. you'll need to fashion alternate endings.

Scene Boosters
Finally, a full-length adventure may need a scene booster or two o help you keep it moving. Here are a few types of boosters you may want to plan on when designing a full-length adventure:
Floaters A floater isn't tied to a specific point in the plot. Instead, it's an event that you can insert whenever you want, The purpose of a floater is to make things interesting, to provide a bit of comic relief, or to spring a false clue or two on the players when they think they've solved the mystery of the day. Consider a floater as a short
burst of action, a small rain cloud that drifts through the plot, waiting for you to unleash the brief shower within it
Here's a floater that you can drop into the sample adventure trigger. As
the heroes race toward Covalt IV, they suddenly pick up a distress signal. The ship's sensors indicate that. except for the heroes' ship, the craft being operated by the pursuing p rates, and the source of the distress call, no other vessels are in the immediate vicinity. The call comes from a damaged trader whose power
plant has blown and whose life sup port systems are offline. The pirates get a chance to catch up if the heroes stop to help, but the heroes could gain a friend for life (or at least « merchant who owes them a favor). If the heroes ignore the distress call, the merchant makes note of their
2 craft. When he's finally rescued, his
goal shifts to finding the heroes and

= making them pay for leaving him-- they now have a new enemy who can pop up in future adventures, ei-

B

ther as a floater again or as an inte-

gral part of the story.

Links
Its always good to build in a few links to the heroes. Early on ina
DESIGH
campaign, you can key links to @
character's roleplaying attributes--
especially Motivation, perks, and
flaws. Later, once you've gotlen to know the heroes, you can create `more personalized (and therefore `more powerful) links to better tie
ADDENTURE characters and story together.
Links aren't scenes. They're subplots designed to fit into the existing story or to work as a parallel con-
struction to the primary tale. Links
can add new elements to the overall plot, or they can inspire improvisation and character development on the part of the players.
A Motivation link appeals to « hero's primary reason for adventuring, while a perk link or a flaw link provides opportunities for heroes to make use of these elements. For example, if a hero in the group is Dirt Poor, then you might add a link to take advantage of his flaw--such as, aclue that waits in a formal restaurant. The Dirt Poor character will have @ hard time making it past the
posh restaurant's maitre d' to obtain
that clue.
In the sample adventure described on page 211, the Collector is an obvious choice as the catalyst for alink. This mysterious figure can exploit the heroes' weaknesses in order to acquire the relic. Using a character's Code of Honor or Infamy against him, feeding an Obsession or Phobia, or taking advantage of a Primitive or Spineless character are all
ways to use the Collector to manipu-
late link subplots.

Twists
Never tell the players or their heroes the complete truth--at least not until the final act of the adventure . .. and sometimes not even then. Save a few surprises to throw at them, or plan & few twists to use if they guess your original plot too quickly. This isn't cheating; it's a way to keep the interactive tale fresh for both you and the players. It's also a way to send the plot in a new direction when things
24 begin to bog down. Consider a twist as a lesser trig-

ger that you can use in the middle of an act or whenever you need to get the action moving again. Twists keep everyone alert and excited. Sometimes you can't plan twists; instead, you have to improvise them in response to the action. Just remember that twists make the unexpected oceur, or the expected fail to occur.
Interludes and
Transitions Sometimes you need to collapse time
before moving to the next scené or
act. You can use interludes and tran-
sitions to accomplish this. Interludes usually occur off-cam-
era, with the players and the Game-
master simply discussing what
occurs during this "downtime." During interludes, characters can conduct research, train, improve skills,
purchase equipment, rest, recover, or
do whatever else is appropriate and allowable within the time frame. Plan for a few interludes in a fulllength adventure. It's usually best to
use them between acts, but whether
that works depends on the demands and needs of the story.
Transitions can oceur during play or between sessions--especially when the Gamemaster determines that nothing significant (such as skill improvement) can occur during this brief downtime. Sure, some transi-
tions can last for a long time, but that time is almost always spent getting to the next scene or act. Think in
terms of movies you've seen when you plan out transitions; whenever a scene ends, there's a fade out, and then a fade in. During the fade, the heroes have moved to the next loca-
tion and time has advanced.
Props
Props are items you can use to make
1o bring the action to life. They in-
clude handouts, maps, illustrations or photographs, music and sound effects, and any other items you may need to add an extra dimension to the adventure.
Handouts A handout is an object (typically a piece of paper or some other printed material) that you give to the players for them to examine and keep. It contains some information--which can be true, false, or some combination

of the two. A representation of a newspaper page or clipping, a scrawled note found at @ murder site, a business card, and a computer screen full of data are examples of handouts. One of the best aspects of handouts is that your players can
gain information without you having
to read it to them; thus, they can stay
in character.
Maps
Almost any adventure needs at least
one map to depict the area in which the adventure unfolds and to keep
track of the locations of all the he-
roes and supporting cast members as they move from place to place. Any single map is either a Gamemaster map or a player map.
Gamemaster maps are for your use only; they contain encounter locations and other important notes you require to run the game. You don't want the players to see this kind of map. You might need maps of the town, city, world, or other location where the adventure takes place. You also might want to have diagrams of ships or specific rooms where action will take place.
You don't have o map every possible location within the area of your adventure. For instance, if the story's only encounter scene takes place in
a hardware shop, then you don't need to map the rest of the city block.
You need maps for some challenge scenes and most combat scenes.
Player maps are used to show players what their heroes can see at a given moment, or they may be special kinds of handouts that the he1oes generate--a computer diagram, blueprints, etc. Some are complete,
and others are purposefully left un-
finished for dramatic reasons. However, any map that the players can hold, examine, and point to greatly enhances the visual imaginings of a roleplaying session.
lustrations Nothing conveys mood and emotion like a good illustration or photograph of what the heroes see. You don't have to be an artist to prepare
visual effects for your game session.
Just find something close to what you're imagining in a book, magazine, or newspaper. Then make a copy and show it to the players at the appropriate moment.

A new initiate receives the blessing of her mentor

Music

Don't go overboard with this kind the climax (and through most of the

Playing music in the background of prop. Save it for the really special rest of the adventure as well). If the

during @ game session is a great

or unusual items, or for adventures magor villain is too tough for them,

way to set the mood of an adventure. where such props will really make let them figure that out and make

Soundtracks from movies can convey the story come alive.

their own decisions.

horror, tension, or drama. Cerlain

performers and types of music also work in this fashion, but usually to a lesser extent, as few groups put out one-theme albums or CDs.

Ending an Adventure
There are only two guidelines you

ADVENTURE Hooks

Various collections of sound ef-

need to remember about the climax Here are a few adventure hooks to

fects are available that you might want to use every now and again. Having a scream, creaking door, or other sound effect cued on your CD

of an adventure. Firs!, an adventure needs to end on a high note. Make the climax of the story full of action and give the heroes plenty todo. A

get your imagination going. Though
these story ideas encompass different time frames and SF subgentes, you can easily adapt any of them for

player can really get the players into climax has to live up to the scenes the type of campaign you want to

the story--and probably make them jump, too!

that come before it. Save the worst dangers, the most powerful villains, and the greatest secrets for the cli-

run. For example, if you change a haunted house into a derelict spaceship, and a deadly ghost into a mur-

Other Items You can use just about anything as

max. Make the stakes high, and the derous alien, you alter raditional payoff will be even higher--whether`horror story into an SF horror story.

prop in an adventure: exotic puzzles, the heroes succeed or not.

cool toys, weird objects, whatever. Keep your eyes open; you just might see something that represents an

Second, give the heroes plenty to do. Not only should they make story decisions and perform actions. but

Hook #1 Hijacked!

alien artifact, a piece of evidence they also need to be the center of the In this modern-day to near-future

from a crime scene, or an ancient

story. The supporting cast should

technothriller, terrorists take control

telic. If players can touch and exam- never show up the heroes, nor should of a high-speed cross-country pas-

ine these items, then they can better imagine the scene their heroes

other characters always rescue them. The adventure is about the he-

senger train. To make matters worse, the President is aboard this train, in

arein.

1oes, so let them take center stage in the middle of an old-fashioned tour

=
b
DESIGH

and media event that's scheduled to end on the coast with a meeting of world leaders. The heroes must find away to take out the terrorists, save the President, and regain control of the train before it gels to the coasi--
where the terrorists plan to detonate
anuclear device in order to kill the gathered leaders and a large section of the population!

Background
A gang of terrorists supporting a fanatical cause has acquired a nuclear weapon. They could have purchased it from a chaotic, collapsing supera ADUENTURE power, or perhaps they stole it from military facility. They board the supertrain early, replacing key staff and setting the nuclear weapon in one of the cargo cars. If anyone tampers with the device, it will explode. As soon as they're ready, the terrorists subdue or kill most of the President's security team and lock away the rest of the passengers. When the adventure opens, the train is 18 hours away from its destination.
The terrorists, armed with an arsenal of conventional weapons, plan to
vacate the train about two hours be-
fore it reaches its destination. Then they will board waiting vehicles and put as much distance as they can between themselves and ground zero.
The heroes are aboard the train
when things get tough. They're ei-
ther passengers or undercover secu-
rity guards who went unnoticed by the terrorists.
Supporting Cast
You should sketch out some hostages
in order to make the scene more real-
istic. Think about disaster movies that you've enjoyed, and use the characters you remember to populate your supporting cast. A mother and her children, a security guard, a conductor, elderly vacationers, the press secretary, and some young newlyweds are good choices. Add as many supporting cast members as you feel necessary to convey a sense of urgency to the heroes, Others can be detailed as the course of the adventure warrants.
You'll also need to sketch out the
common terrorists, the lieutenants, and the terrorist leader. Make the leader and his lieutenants especially capable and memorable.

26

Trigger Scene
Read or paraphrase this trigger
scene that ignites the action:
The dining car is packed tonight, full of passengers and members of the
President's entourage--including Secret Service agents and other security types. You find a table and start to peruse the menu when the calm scene explodes into chaos. Waiters pull automatic weapons and surround the President. Shots ring out,
and a few of the Secret Service agents go down. Others, you notice,
appear to be sick or drugged. In just a few moments, the attackers neutralize the security detail and usher
the President and a few of his statf
out of the car. Passengers are whimpering or screaming, when more shots fill the air. The panicked crowd goes silent as @ man with a« machine gun steps atop a table. "We have taken control of this train. The President is our prisoner and the rest of you are hostages. Cooperate, and no `more harm will befall you. Cause trouble, and you will die."
What do you do?
Hook #@2:
Installation 251
You can use this trigger in any setting, though it's presented here as contemporary horror SF tale. Somewhere in the cold depths of the Alaskan wilderness, inside a secret
government facility that doesn't offi-
cially exist, scientists are about to let loose a terror from beyond the stars. This creature is a killing machine, bred for battle and designed to hunt and kill with extreme skill. It even seems to enjoy the thrill of the hunt. It it escapes from the facility, humanity is doomed.
Background
The military recently captured a spacecrait of alien origin. The vessel, damaged on its trip to Earth, crashed in an isolated region, where heavily armed soldiers quickly quarantined it. The remains of the vessel and its wounded occupant were collected and transferred to a secret base in the Alaskan wilderness. Here, a team of scientists began an
eexhaustive program to learn as
much as possible about the creature
and its technology.

The alien, however, wasn't as badly injured as the scientists believed. It escaped from its cell and began systematically killing the sci-
entists and the soldiers protecting
them. Before it could leave the facili-
ty. however, one soldier was able to
seal the base--trapping the alien and the survivors inside.
Time passed without word from the facility, and a storm is about to enguli the area. The heroes are sent to check on the base--though they
aren't fold anything about the work
done there or the "guest" housed in its depths. That information is classified. The action starts as the heroes arrive at the facility.
Supporting Cast
`This one's pretty simple. All you really need to do is detail the alien. Make it pretty powerful, since it should pose a significant threat to ot only the heroes, but also the
world at large. Maybe it's a self-
replicating creature that's about to split in two. Or maybe it reproduces by planting eggs in host organisms
(such as the base's scientists and sol-
diers). Or it may be reconstructing a deadly weapon from the remains of its spacecraft, Does it have any kind
of code or conscience that the heroes
would recognize, or are its motives
totally alien and unfathomable?
You might also detail a few scien-
tists or soldiers--members of the
base's personnel who have managed to remain alive since the facility was
sealed. These characters can serve
as help for the heroes if necessary, or they can require the actions of the heroes to save them.
Trigger Scene
Read or paraphrase this opening to the players:
You arrive at the facility just ahead of the storm, though swirls of wind and snow already cloak the sky. The code given to you by the briefing team opens the base's doors; the `space beyond is dark and foreboding. Red lights flash in dark recesses, indicating that the base was on alert when the facility shut down. You step past the thick emergency doors just as a computer voice announces, "This facility is under DefCon 4 quarantine. Outer emergency doors are being resealed." The huge metal doors begin to slide shut.
What do you do?

Hook #3: Murder

on Asteroid

36

This adventure works best in a nearfuture PL 6 campaign, though you
can use it in any setting with a
Progress Level of 6 or higher. A mining detail has uncovered an
alien artifact on Asteroid 36. The arti-
fact, however, isn't just a dormant
chunk of ancient technology. It possesses a malevolent aura that can `bend the wills of the weak-minded and turn others into psychopathic murderers,

Background
The Mars Stellar Resources Company has been mining asteroids for over a decade. Recently, « new mining base was set up on the large asteroid designated number 36. This
hunk of rock and metal, about six
kilometers across, is rich in precious ores. The base contains mining and ore-processing facilities. It houses a statf of 118 people, sach of whom
lives and works at the base for six
months at time.
Well into the second month of the
current work shift, miners working in acrater at the far end of the asteroid broke into a huge cave. Within that cave, they discovered evidence of an ancient civilization. Among the ruins
was an artifact, a monolith of great
size, constructed of unknown materi-
als. The cave was sealed off, and the
base administrator sent a message o his superiors on Mars.
The heroes, in the employ of the
Mars Stellar Resources Company,
are sent to examine the artifact and
secure it for further study. When they
arrive, the base is in chaos. At least two miners have been savagely murdered, and everyone exhibits ex-
treme fear and paranoia. Some claim they hear voices in the night; others report that strange beings have invaded the complex. Everyone is on
edge, and the administrator seems
like he's about to lose control.
In truth, the artifact is projecting images and emotions into the minds
of the staff. Whether innocent in nature or truly evil, the alien images are driving the miners insane--and
the longer the heroes remain in the
presence of the artifact, the more
crazed they will becotne. They must subdue the murderers before they can secure the artifact for further study.

Supporting Cast
You should detail the administrator and other base staff, including miners, crew chiefs, foremen, security, and geologists. None of them are completely sane (and a few are more crazy and homicidal than others). You might also need to add supporting cast members to the heroes' research team, especially if the heroes aren't experts in archaeology. geology or other necessary sciences.
Trigger Scene
Read or paraphrase this opening
scene to start the action:
The system liner drops your research launch on the asteroid's landing pad, then pulls away toward the safety of open space. An airlock extends from the mining base to provide an egress to the facility. The hatches cycle through, and you step into the base.
Three people approach you: a tall man you recognize as the facility administrator, awoman wearing a union foreman's insignia, and a man wearing a battle vest and a sidearm. All three look nervous and anxious. In the distance, you hear a pitiful scream, followed by insane laughter.
"The loonies are at it again," the `man with the sidearm mautters, dropping his hand to his weapon.
The administrator throws him an
angry glance, then turns toward you.
"Thank heavens you've arrived." he says. "It's been @ madhouse here, and I'm at my wit's end."
"That wasn't a long trip," the fore-
`man snarls, her eyes darting back and forth between you and the two access corridors leading deeper into the base. "I say we just call for the liner and scrub this asteroid. It's jinxed or haunted--or both.
Suddenly, @ man emerges from the corridor to the right. He's completely suited up, as though he plans to leave the base. "You won't kill me, tool" he shouts, reaching for the airlock controls. None of you are wearing protective clothing. If that hatch opens, you're doomed.
What do you do?
FHioroskt C#o4:ntact
This adventure is designed for an exploration or space opera campaign setat PL7 or beyond. It involves the crew of an exploration vessel en-

countering a totally new alien spe-
== cies. Are these aliens friends or foes?
Will the heroes make a good impression, or will they doom future negotiations by the decisions they make? B
Background
The heroes' starship enters a new region of space and receives a communication signal of unknown and alien origin. They trace the signal to a ship that is al the farthest limit of JUNLNINCE their sensors. Moments later, a second ship, similar to the first, enters sensor range. It's on an intercept
course for the first ship, which con-
tinues to broadcast its indecipher- NAISI0 able message at the heroes' vessel. As the heroes analyze the sensor readings, the second ship fires « weapon that uses an unknown energy source at the first ship. The first ship spirals down to the fifth planet in an uncharted star system--a planet capable of supporting human life, `but showing no signs of advanced civilization. The second ship follows
it down. The commander of the ex-
ploration craft orders the heroes to investigate, stressing that they
should evaluate the situation before
getting involved in any contlicts.
Supporting Cast
In addition to any important supporting cast members of the ship's crew,
you should define the aliens. Are the
crews of both ships the same? Are there subtle differences the herces
`might not readily see? Are the pursuers the bad guys, or are those being chased actually criminals? Once you decide these issues, the plot of the story will fall into place.
Trigger Scene
This adventure can begin in a few ways, depending on what you decide about the aliens' nature. Here's one scene you might use to get the adventure started:
Your scout ship enters orbit around the fifth planet and scans the surface. It doesn't take long to locate the alien ships: The first one has been severely damaged, but the other is intact. You start down, planning to land a short distance from their location s0 you can observe the aliens in
action. Just then, your sensors pick up
a massive energy surge--the crew from the second ship apparently
a plans on annihilating the first ship!
What do you do?

The ALTERNITY game system includes several optio#stBitvou can use to add diversily fosdoriahpel game atylesmd genres. These are the Player's Hari@Buakchapters on mutants, palonlSRase cybernetics At the end of this chapter, another game@iPtias, the FX system, is prosapiett Hisyaws o
psdhoe1owctiuyesloirdogumhicnawhvtohehoeestahecAecLrtTeoEsRtsaoNlIltTuooYswesigmtaahnmielyaseerofwpotopohwtreiksoesenrsfao.ilnpIeftriutowhlneeissthgtiornoorbyuweopuiutorhsfceefludi#ftdfpieanleiigogsnnlai.inycc,.lutThdcheeyesvbmielrolinaxmienotuifsctca,ahnnaatnd,radcsomtuveeprurtptyyaponnartcsotihwnagraaaddiee,5
the heroes should run into a mutant villain, When'no one can counter the heroe: spacial game play quickly gets out of balance.

=]

TOROIL0

ST

MuTAnTS

Agents--psoibly even mutant Mind even if they don't have much persc

walkers.

ale

nce with them. The socia

hapter 14: Mutants in the F mmdbook describes a fantastic ap sach to scierce fiction mutations although you could use the lower
t mutations o represent ge. ly enginered heroes ol as from worids where the human has boen subtly o ged. fyou

One last thing to remember: If you oF one of your players has a great idea for a new mutation power or ven a different mutant drawback, use it Most of the time, it's best if you kesp your new powers reasonable. Belance in the game is important but it's your campaign. If you want

authorities ha rules and mea accommodate mutants nto the culture. Any player can create a mutant hero in this type of campaign as he
or she desires.
The last option presents the extreme point that everyone is a mutant. Whether as the result of

hooge to play with this option, you true superherces, introduce a fe in- massive irradiation from nuclear

should decide if the mutat jons were induced accidentally or deliberately.

credible mutant powers and reduce
the number of drawbacks.

You will also need to decide if the
mutant hero is uniqueor amember ot a group that shaves the same char cteristics.

tMhuetantCs ampainign

fallout or the tinkering of master-
mind aliens, humanity has changed. Its up to you to determinwe hether everyone has the same muta
eac individual has develc unique powers.

In the Player's Handbook, mutants As you consider integrating mutants

tepresent a choice of species. Rath
them choosing
fan alien specie:

into your universe, look at these four alfernatives. The first one is simple
Mutant heroes don't exist, Indeed,

Incorporating Mutants

opportunity toroleplay o hero w!

this may represent the most realistic The decision whether or not to inc

Pan altersd human. The choice to play choice. Mutations in this niverse

o mutant is not a-choice of profes

exist, but are usually harmful and

porate mutants in your is campaign completely up to you. If you're not

sion. There are mutant Diplomats
Combat Specs, Tech Ops, and Free

often fatal, No mutation conveniently certain that you v at mutants in develops into an extraordinary, hero- your game, fry few roleplaying ses

ic power.

sions with one mutant hero. Use mu

The second option is to rule that

tant villains and supporting cast

mutant powers are incredibly rare.

paringly. f, after a few adventu

The mutation system presented
in the Player's Handbook does not allow for character who are

Only aselect few have access to them. These characters may be denizens of a single world, or pro-

he mutant rul

working for

allow the presence of more mutants

tocreep into you mpaign.

members of an alien species fo play mutants. There's no rea s0n you can't chooss o allow
certain alien races to indulge

duced by extremely expensive gov-

Accidental vs. emment and corporate experiments
Only those who meet very specific

qualifications can be mutants. The

Deliberate

in genatic experimentation or

few mutemts who do exist are likely The question of accidental versus

random mutagenics, The factor you'll want to be aware of is the possibility of a weren hero with a Strength score of 18, or « fraal with an Intelligence score of 18,

1o be objects of scorn and scrutiny.
Humanity, much like any animal species, doesn't enjoy competition
with a superior.
The third option posits that mutants are simply uncommon. Most
e know that mutants exist,

deliberate mutations affects the
level of genetic engineering and su-
perhumans you want to see in your
game. Accidental mutations can't

predicted or controlled; the hero or
his ancestors underwent a genetic change because of exposure to

29

ation or a mutagenic substance. An normal heroic campaign, mutant he-

entire race of accidental mutants

roes should be permitted only if

might be possible, if a colony is

they are created with significant

founded on a planet or in an environ- disadvantages.

ment with unusual and special prop- Mutants who are members of @

erties. Depending on the nature of

group of similar individuals should

the mutation, members of this colony be treated much like a new character

might be hated, feared, or pitied by the rest of the galaxy.

species. Like any nonhuman species, mutants should have both advan-

Deliberate mutations might repre- tages and disadvantages. If heroes

sent attempts by a secret organiza- come from some particularly sturdy

tion to breed supersoldiers or

or dangerous stock, they may en-

superagents. If the hero is no longer counter villains with similar or even

associated with the organization

superior genetic enhancements.

that funded the mutant metamorpho-

Psionics sis, it may seek to capture its fugitive
mutant. Such outlaws represent

enormous investments at risk.
Sometimes, a group of people `might be subjected to deliberate mu-
tation for benign reasons. For in-
stance, colonists who will be establishing a home on @ high-gravity world might be augmented by superstrong bones, muscles, and
vascular systems to resist the gravi-
ty, while colonists bound for an ocean world might be provided with

Many science fiction stories assume that a few special humans and alien species possess the ability to master mental powers. Today, we have only the most nebulous and imprecise understanding of what these powers may be ... but in the future, people may be specially bred, engineered, trained, or cybernetically enhanced to control psychic energies.

psi-talent who uses his powers
against the unsuspecting and defenseless world around him.
If you want to allow Mindwalkers but keep them extremely rare individuals, you may use an Ability Score generation method that makes it difficult for players to predict or place scores. If a player is lucky enough to roll the prerequisites for the Mindwalker profession, he can

gills and fins to better survive in

choose that profession for his hero;

their new home.

tPhsieonicCs ampinaign

but otherwise, he'll have to choose another profession. An interesting

Individual vs.

Four basic options exist for integrat-

Community

ing mental powers into your cam-

Heroes who are unique mutants,
either by accident of birth or by design, should be extremely unusual characters. They'll have capabilities that raise them head and shoulders above the general population. Allow
your players to create mutant char-
acters if you intend to play @ super-
heroic campaign o to put the heroes in extreme situations. In a

paign setting. The first one, and obviously the simplest, is to decide that they simply don't exist. Abilities such as ESP, clairvoyance, and telekinesis are hoaxes and trickery, and have no place in the light of science.
`The second option is to rule that psionic powers are available only to a very limited or select group of characters. For example, there may be an extremely rare psi-gene that

activates under certain conditions or only among a select few. A hero

without this psi-gene could study the discipline for decades without be-

coming a Mindwalker. Maybe expo-

variation of this scenario is to bar the profession to human heroes, but to allow characters of certain alien species--iraal. for instance--to choose Mindwalker as profession.
The third option is to decide that psionic talents are uncommon, but not unheard of. The man on the
street knows that intelligence agen-
cies and law enforcement groups
employ psions, and accepts this asa
fact of life. A psion in this scenario
`may have to have special registra-
tions, permits, or other legal limitations on his actions, but there isa societal infrastructure in place to handle people like her. A player can create a Mindwalker as desired in this type of campaign, since they're

a0

sure to a certain planet's soil or
radiation brings out psionic talent. Or perhaps an expensive alien technology catalyzes mental energies. Rore and unusual, these Mindwalkers might be ruthlessly sought out and exterminated as threats to so ety, or haressed as invaluable espionage assets. The public may be unaware of or not believe in the existence of psionic powers. A hero with the Mindwalker profession is possible, but should be the rarest of characters. The most horrifying villain imaginable is the wild or rogue

not that unusual.
`The final option is radical, and will change the nature of your campaign. What if, someday in the future or on an alternate Earth, everyone possesses psionic powers? In this scenario, no one selects the Mindwalker profession; everyone, including the heroes, has free access to the Mindwalker broad and specialty skills in Chapter 14: Psionics in the Player's Handbook. Mindwalker skills in this case become Open skills, available to everyone.

Incorporating Mindwalkers
The decision whether or not to incor-

ture, and concealed weaponry to

embodying a threat that human qu-

neural computer nets that interface thorities are legally bound to hunt directly with the character's mind. down and destroy. Characters may make improvements In the third option, heroes have

--o
b

porate Mindwalkers in your cam-

on their basic human characteristics access to cybernetic enhancements,

`paign is completely up to you. If

in order to add speed, reflexes, sens- and the technology is reasonably

you're not certain that you want

es, memory, or intelligence.

priced and accepted by the masses.

psionic characters running amok in

Minor, stylistic, and fashion-con-

your game, try a test run with only one Mindwalker hero in the party. Use psionic villains sparingly. If,

tChyebernCetiacsmpaignin

scious cybertech improvements are

common. Pilots might be wired for

by reflexes, infantrymen protected

T6NOILAD

after a few adventures, the psionics rules are working for your campaign, you can always expand the presence of Mindwalkers. On the other hand, if you don't like the capabilities of Mindwalker characters or the flavor they add to your game, you can gently retire the characters concerned

Like other "improved humans." cyborgs differ from the average man. They can do things that normal
Homo sapiens can't. Fear and resent-
ment are the likely result.
There are three ways to view cybernetics in your campaign: the tech-
nology doesn't exist; the technology

damage-resistant structures, and corporate executives implanted with databases for instant access. The `mechalus represents the ultimate in STIN4 this spectrum; all members of the
species contain technology that augments their biological systems.

and continue with your game.

ARTIFICIAL exists but its use is morally ques-
tionable or requires an exorbitant

Talents
Dealing with talents is probably a bit easier than dealing with fullfledged Mindwalkers in your campaign. Indeed, introducing a talent or two may be the best way to bring

INTELLIGENCE amount of resources; or the technolo-
gy exists and is widely available.

In a campaign using the first op-
tion, the technology of active cyber-
ware--mechanical components
activated by the user's thought or

Can computers become self-aware? 1 you assume that artificial intelligence is possible, a spectrum of supporting characters and heroes

psionics into your campaign for the

will--may never be developed. It

becomes possible. There are three

first time.
It's up to you whether talents exist
in your campaign; you can decide that only talents exist, and that

might be possible to implant a laser pistol in @ human hand, but firing it as an act of will may never be possible. If you don't want to deal with

general cases you should consider before you decide where atificial in-
telligence fits into your campaign:
it's impossible, it's possible at high

Mindwalkers don't. This type of cam- cybernetics in your campaign, you

cost, or it's possible without extraor-

paign may present a human species just beginning its exploration of mental powers and energies. For the

can decide that neural interface

dinary effort.

technology has yet to be invented. Or

If artificial intelligence is impos-

it might have been invented once

sible, you won't have to worry about

sake of simplicity, you could also make a choice to disallow talent characters while allowing Mindwalkers--either you've got the juice, or you don't.

and abandoned as too dangerous. Even if the technology is avail-
able, people may have many reasons why they're reluctant to use it. 1f it costs six hundred million dollars

sentient computers in your cam-
paign. Any computer equipment the
heroes use resembles the machines of the 20th century. The technology may be faster and more capable.

(or even only six million dollars) to

Slow as they are in electronic terms,

CYBERTECH build bionic limbs, then very few

humans may limit the potential ca-

people are going to be able to afford The third major game option present- cybernetic enhancements.

pability of future computers. The second possibility is that arti-

ed in the Player's Handbook features technologically enhanced characters. While powerful computers, ro-

The second option is that society ficial intelligence is possible, but imconsiders tinkering with the human practical for all but a few specialized body to be morally reprehensible-- uses. Perhaps the only way to make

bots, cyber-enhanced humans, and selt-aware Grid programs are a part of many high-tech game settings,
you have the option of ignoring
them, leaving them as background elements of your campaign, or allowing heroes to make full use of these special capabilities by creating enhanced heroes.
Humans who have been enhanced by the surgical implantation of inor-
ganic systems and structures into
their bodies are cybernetic heroes. These systems range from pure physical enhancements such as dermal armor, reinforced skeletal struc-

cyborgs are frightening abominations of technology, and most people feel that they're just wrong. In this type of setting, a hero with cybernetic enhancements will be very rare--
the Gamemaster might decide that
obtaining cyberware implants requires an extraordinary effort or
background, one with a terrible price
tag attached. For instance, the hero
`might have to submit to implanted
modules that allow a controlling organization to override free will and commandeer the hero for its own purposes. Cybemetic heroes may live completely outside human law,

a self-aware computer is to use a
large amount of living neural tissue suspended in a bulky and expensive life-support system. Or, maybe arti cial intelligences have to leam how tothink cognitively, like humans. Once the machine is built, it may take years to achieve sentience, Or artificial intelligences may be too advanced, unstable, or inhuman for comiort. They're dangerous or unreliable, subject to psychoses, mood swings, or megalomania. The upshot of this option is that artificial intelligences are built for special purposes
2 and caretully controlled by human
supervision. Heroes only interact

with mechanical intelligences in

rare or unusual adventures.

Finally, if antificial intelligences are relatively common, everyone has

access lo computers or machines

with decision-making abilities. What

does this mean for your campaign? It

means that the heroes have equipment that may be smarter than they

are. Imagine that the ship's computer

is perfectly capable of minding the

store while the heroes are out exploring the planet. Such a computer may

monitor their progress, offer suggestions, and even fire up the engines

and fly to the rescue if the heroes get into trouble. It might even be possible to allow one of the players to 1un the ship's computer as a member
of the group of heroes.

Crystal lattice circuitry switch it on can serve as a substitute for a trained medic.
In a society where artificial intelli-

Common Als provide a safety net for the heroes. Instead of leamning a
whole battery of highly technical skills, they can buy advanced com-
puters and software for the tasks

gences are common, one crucial
issue might arise: How does the law recognize, protect, or regulate intelligent machines? Maybe Als come with a kill switch to lerminate them

they need to accomplish. I there isn't adoctor in the party. a portable com puter with medical diagnosis software and a hero who knows how to

if they get out of control ... ora
pain/pleasure switch to ensure complete obedience. What's the morality at stake here? If a hero shoots a

desktop computer with an Al pro gram, is he guilty of murder, or de: struction of property? Do Als have the right to quit if they don't like their employers? The way in which Als are regarded by society might have assignificant influence on the tech-
nology and social structure of the
campaign. It might also tell you a lot about the benevolence of the society.
Robots and
Androids
1f artificial intelligence is possible in compact form, a seli-aware machine with locomotive and manipulative powers might be built. In a society in which Als are rare, expensive, or regulated in some fashion, thinking robots will be extremely unusual--it would be much easier for an immo bile Al to control remotely operated 1obot vehicles than it would be to mount the Al computer brain in a mobile chassis.
It's worth noting that a robot is not
necessarily a self-aware machine that acts like a human in a metal
suit. Robots take many forms; the advanced manufacturing machines in use today are robots, as are many space probes, remote-piloted vehicles, and similar devices. In the future, robot technology may embrace

anything from automated terraform-

ing or mining machines to nanotech
surgical devices that repair the human body from the inside out. In

`most science fiction campaigns,

single-task robots like these will be as common as screwdrivers; people will think nothing of passing autoharvesters in the fields, or dispatching mail and messages on

programmed couriers.

On the other hand, intelligent o bots will be uncommon but not extra: ordinary in societies where Alis a

commonplace tool. All the considerations mentioned in the preceding discussion still apply--are robots citizens, and if not, what exactly is their status? Robots are likely to be far better than humans at many tasks, but completely unsuitable for

others. Robot surgeons make sense--

but robot doctors or psychologists

don't, since they may not be able to

truly appreciate the mental or spiri-

tual sides of the human condition.

Typically, robots will be reserved for

2

use in jobs that humans would find
difficult, boring. dangerous, or die-

tasteful, and intelligent robots used only for the most challenging of

FX

Some FX are decidedly special. They allow a character to alter the

these.
Androids are a different matter. For our purposes, we'll assume that an android is defined as a robot of human appearance. Even if Al is so advanced that a complete personality can be packed into a man-sized frame, the engineering difficulties of creating something that moves and acts like a human will be enormous. While the human form is useful for humans, it's not the ideal shape for a variety of tasks, such as heavy excavation, flying, or fighting. Intelligent 1obots designed for these specialty tasks are more likely to be clearly `mechanical in nature, with @ body
shape and external covering suit-
able for their work. In short, there has to be a good reason to build a mechanical being in the shape of human.
The same considerations for any artificial being apply to androids ...

An optional rule you might want to
consider for your campaign is "FX." Short for "special effects," FX refers to any ability or power a character possesses that's beyond the norm. Magic, miracles, enchanted items, superscience gizmos, and comicbook superpowers are encompassed by the FX system. As such, most campaigns should use these rules sparingly. if at all. They're appropriate for some types of campaigns, but can quickly ruin the flavor of a more traditional science liction setting.
You can modify this system as you see fit for your campaign. In some campaigns, heroes have no more than one FX to call upon, and some. characters have no access to FX at all. In other campaigns, every char-
acter has one or more FX abilities. It
all depends on the type of stories you
`want to tell.

world around him in strange, unusual, and often powerful ways. When you've decided that FX is the way to go to handle a specific effect, the Tules presented below will help you regulate that effect in a fair and con-
sistent manner.
FX Skills All FX fall under one of the three broad skills. When creating an FX, the first step is to decide which of the broad skills best defines the effect in general terms. The three FX broad skills are Arcane Magic, Faith, and Super Power.
FX specialty skills, on the other hand, aren't completely mapped out for you like other specialty skills in the ALTERNITY game. Guidelines over
the next few pages give you a good
start, providing suggestions and
some examples. For the most part,

but androids raise the specter of replacement. If a robot i clearly a me-

Deciding

on FX

you and your players are on your own. You have to decide the extent of

chanical being, everyone knows that You have to consider if the special

there are laws and standards that

abilities and powers you want in

apply just to artificials. But an an-

your campaign can better be han-

droid who can pass for human repre- dled by one of the other existing

sents a threat to the entire species, game mechanics. In some cases, you

especially if it is generally superior to humans. It's not unreasonable for future Al engineers to deliberately

aren't really looking for an FX, you simply need to add a new skill to the skill list. In other cases, the FX you or

avoid the human form, in order to re- your players have in mind might bet-

assure the public that their creations ter fall under mutations or psionics,

know their place in the cosmos. On or it might simply require the inven-

the other hand, robots might be de- tion of a new bit of cybertech.

liberately built in android form to

any FX and the cost associated with
it. "Purchasing FX Skills," later in this chapter, tells you how fo do this.
Arcane Magic FX
Wizardry and sorcery fit in most fantasy roleplaying games, and you might want to make them available for use in this game as well. Arcane Magic is a fantastic effect produced through the use of ritual, word, or will, or a combination of these three

avoid having them look mechanical

and inhuman . .. its all a matter of how society perceives the artificial

Why Use the

being.

All that said, androids can make

for very interesting characters in a

game, either as villains or as heroes.

Even if androids are reviled by the public and strictly prohibited by law,

many governments and corporations

won't be able to resist the temptation

to build superagents who can be pro-

grammed for complete loyalty, utter

ruthlessness, and photographic memory. Since androids represent

some expenditure of resources, time,

and money. no one will build one

and then just set it free--they'll build

the android for a specific purpose or for commercial gain.

JZE)

-yo
»
RULES
OPTIONAL

7'

5

Celestial communication

components. Spells and incantations allows Arcane Magic of a limited are the stuff of Arcane Magic, as are and more manageable type to be in-

`many occult-oriented FX, such as

cluded in a campaign. Of course,

transforming into an animal or ani-

since magic is only an object of myth

mal-human hybrid. Consider Arcane and bedtime stories in most modern

Magic to be the science of the un-

and futuristic societies, even the

known, ancient lore that employs en- smallest bit of real magic can be

chantment the way modern scholars stunningly powerful.

use the scientific method.

Arcane Magic often requires a re- Arcane Magic

peated ceremony or gesture ("the rit- Special

ual'), an incantation or spell ("the Arcane Magic manifests as a spell

word"), and the spellcaster's own

that can be cast to produce a specific

inner strength, concentration, and

effect. Each Arcane Magic specialty

desire ("the will") to produce a magi- skill is in fact a single spell, such as

cal FX. Sometimes it may require

blast of fire, arcane shield, and wolf-

specific components that are used up form.

during the ritual, or a focus of some

Spells fall into these general cate-

sort, such as an amulet, talisman, or gories: augur, conjure, summon, and

wand.

transform.

Once a character possesses this

» Rugur spells are designed to

FX broad skill, the types of specialty uncover secrets, predict the future, or

skills that can be added are nearly glean information through supernat-

limitless. Each specialty (in effect, ural means. Examples include read-

each spell or spell-like FX) must be ing tea leaves, casting runestones,

purchased separately, as detailed calling forth images in mirrors or

below.

crystals, using a divining rod, read-

Using this system, an Arcane Magic user will never match the

ing cards, using a lodestone, or even
consulting supernatural beings.

power and versatility of a traditional
P2fantasy spellcaster. The FX system

» Conjure spells are magical effects that create something from

nothing. Such a magical creation doesn't last long, and it can be as insubstantial as an illusion or as real as a burst of flame. These magical effects can be designed to deceive
another's senses, causing others to
see or hear things that aren't there; or they can be more substantial, actually calling matter into being for a limited time. Examples include all kinds of illusions; spontaneous natural effects such as balls of fire, bolts of lightning, or a cloud of acid rain; small physical items of minor consequence such as tools; coins, or toys; small physical items of major
consequence such as precious met-
als, jewels, or hand-held weapons: and large physical items such as vehicles and shelters. Conjure spells are also used to create shields of magical energy, auras of magical protection, and wards of all types.
» Summon spells involve magical movement--opening dimensional doors or otherworldly portals to traverse the space between here and there, transporting by will and spell alone, summoning an otherworldly creature through the flux of time and space, and otherwise moving the

spellcaster, people, and things by arcane means.
» Transform spells allow casters to change the nature of objects, people, or themselves. Examples of

16 like technology in your campaign,
then use the Super Power FX in your FX AuTERNITY game. A Super Power
A can be the result of a fantastic muta
tion, a research project, arcane lore,

transform spells include changing

mythology come true, alien technolo-

one material into another (such as

gy, or even alien intervention

coal to diamond), transforming a foe
into a frog, turning oneself into an
animal, altering onesell into an animal hybrid (such as taking on the

Arcane Magic Faith
Super Power

Some Super Power FX might require a ritual or relic to use, but most tend to be part of a character's natural makeup. Once a character is im- TUHOILd0

form of a werewollf or other supernat-

bued with a Super Power FX, it's hers

ural creature), and bestowing en-
chantments on mundane objects.
Faith FX Miracles and divine intervention all fall under the heading of Faith FX. If
you want primitive shamans, exotic
clerics, and holy men of all beliefs to receive power based on their belief, then you might want to make this FX available in your ALTERNITY game. Through prayer. divine contact, communal belief, and holy ritual, miracles can be accomplished.
While Faith FX has its share of ceremony and ritual, it also has an additional element not found in Arcane Magic. Faith requires not only unyielding belief, but an agency out-
side the caster to serve as a source
for the FX. This outside agency can be a god, spirit, divine being, conscious force, or even the collective faith of a community of believers that gives a holy man his spiritual power. Sometimes a holy item or relic is required, and other components may be needed for the ritual portion of the miraculous request.
After a character possesses this FX broad skill, he must purchase one of these specialties: Ordinary mira-

Unlike with Arcane Magic, there are no specific spells associated
with spiritual magic. Instead, a mir-
acle-worker chooses a general level of power. The effect sought after can never be more powerful than the quality of the Faith FX specialty skill chosen by the character.

to use--at least until the FX energy runs out {see "FX Energy" below).
Once a character possesses this ST1NY FX broad skill, the types of specialty skills that she can add are nearly limitless. Each specialty Super Power FX must be purchased sepaxately, as detailed below.

» Ordinary miracles can be performed by any character with the Faith FX broad skill. They provide minor bonuses or penalties (-] or +1 step); heal small amounts of stun, wound, or fatigue damage; provide very limited, very general information; or give some other minor beneit for a short duration.
» Good miracles provide medium
bonuses or penalties (-2 or +2 steps);
heal medium amounts of stun, wound, or latigue damage; heal no more than | point of mortal damage; provide specific information; or give some other medium benefit for short duration.
» Amazing miracles provide `major bonuses or penalties (-3 or +3 steps); heal large amounts of stun, wound, or fatigue damage; heal mortal damage: provide expert informa-
tion; or give some other significant
benefit for a short duration.

Super Power
Specialties Super Power FX manifests as powers or abilities beyond the scope of nature, or as magical or supertechnological items of great power. Each Super Power specialty skill is a spe-
cific ability or item. Every Super Power specialty is in one of these categories: enchanted relic, extreme ability, or overscience gadget.
» Enchanted relic includes mystical, magical, and mythological items of power that fall into a character's `possession. King Arthur's sword Excalibur, Thor's hammer, the Holy Grail, an enchanted cloak of invisibility or flight, Hercules' belt of strength, Roland's horn, and the Golden Fleece are all examples of enchanted relics.
» Extreme ability handles FX that are part of a character's natural `makeup, though there doesn't have

Super Power FX cles, Good miracles, or Amazing mir-
acles. This determines the quality of

to be anything natural about the power's origin. Flying, firing bolts of

rgmaFtiebalaciimrltUteiyaettcshtohilonrefp.osgrmauietgtathhsrthitacasdhtotishrattyiehsohsehcntieghaamphalmore,awramcanetnperiworrAawainlwcleLdrnlTiecvota-thEenwbrRsedoaNir--kIeTrYFcsgbruoeaaypldmnitegcthiarsecehs,ttsebaSi,rcnouadomeppkseaa,rrcboghiwiPslcaiuoeartpiwaslesecse,rtiretvesrlFimisluXklasep.ia,nIertfasehr,yrosohcsuoceaariwnnemoednfaalcnegetdic-

energy, turning into lire or water, becoming invisible or intangible, sticking to walls, and manipulating gravity are all examples of extreme abilities. Each extreme ability isa separate specialty skill.

in a fantasy setling. The FX system

allows miracles of a limited nature

to be part an of ALTEANITY campaign.

Faith Specialties
Faith manifests as miracles that produce specitic effects. Each Faith specialty skill description provides general guidelines under which a character can pray for specific aid or effect.

Power FX specialty skills, use Tanig

FX G71: ARCANE Macic & SupER Powen

the SPECIALTY SkiiL Costs. Add up

FX Specialty Skil Abi y Score boost (+1/+3/+5)

Cost
51015

varying effects you've built into an FX to get a base cost for the skill
FX specialty skills with a total base cost of § points or less are con-

Bonus steps (-1/-2/-3) Penalty steps (+1/+2/+3) Bonus to damage (1/2/3 points) Bonus to combat movement Fatigue damage (1-4 points) Stun damage (1-5 pi its)

357
3517
2/4/6
51015

sidered to be of Ordinary quality; a total base cost of 6-10 points indicates Good quality; and a total base
cost of 11-15 points is Amazing qual-
ity. No FX specialty skill can have a base cost of more than 15 points.
The quality of a specialty skill de-

Stun damage (6-10 points) Stun damage (11-15 points])
Wound damage (1-5 points)
Wound damage (6-10 paints) Wound damage (11-15 points])

termines its cost in FX energy to use (see "FX Energy" below).
Improving the rank of an FX specially skill is done the same as for other specialty skills. The skill point cost is equal to the current rank

Mortal damage (1-2 points)

added to the base skill cost

Mortal damage (3-5 points)

Damage type (0/6/A)

Designing

FX

Low impact (LI) attack

Specialties

High impact (HI) attack Energy (En) attack Duration, instant

Much of the material to follow is sub-
jective: you must weigh design para-
meters and make decisions on FX

Duration (1/2/3 time units)

that could fall one way or the other.

Flight or other special movement Knowledge
Range, personal

It's usually better to lean toward the `more expensive costs when an FX skill cost is in doubt

Range, 2/4/6 meters Range, 10/20/30 meters Range, 100/200/300 meters Range, 1/2/3 kilometers
Travel (1 km/10 km/100 km)

DSteepscr1ib: e the FX
Write a paragraph that describes the FX specialty. Does the FX specialty cause damage? Protect from damage? Does it allow flight? Time trav-

el? What exactly do you want the

» Overscience gadget covers a

can never have more than one of the

variety of fantastic inventions, alien FX broad skills.

technologies, and far-future gizmos

After selecting an FX broad skill,

that surpass even the best technology of the era. Flight rings, super

the hero must purchase associated specialty skills separately. Purchas-

force-field belts, advanced suits of

ing a broad skill provides no benefit

mart" attack armor, shields crafted other than qualifying the character

from indestructible meteorites, web- 1o buy specialty skills. The standard

shooting wrist bands, utility belts full of high-tech gadgets, ray-beam

costs for the broad skills are shown COSTs on TABLE G69: FX BROAD SkiLL.

gauntlets, and alien weapons of ex- As always, the Gamemaster is free

treme destruction are all examples

1o modiy the costs listed to fit the

of overscience gadgets. Also, look to Chapter 12: Alien Artifacts for addi-

particulars of his or her campaign. FX specialty skills are purchased

tional ideas for creating overscience much like any other specialty skills,

spell, gadget, or superpower to be able to accomplish?
The first step in designing the specialty skill is to consider which Ability the FX is associated with (Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Will, or Personality). The Ability Score becomes the base score needed to successfully use the FX, but make sure you have a logical connection to the Ability you've se-
lected. In other words, don't arbitrari-
ly connect an FX to a high Ability Score. (For Faith FX, Will is always used as the relevant Ability.)

gadgets

Purchasing

FX Skills

1 FX are used in your campaign,

i

then characters have the option to purchase an FX broad skill. A hero

though the cost is based on the quality of a particular skill's effect.
For Faith FX specialty skills, this is shown on TasLE G70: FaITH FX SeecimTy SkiLL CosTs. The cost of each Faith FX specialty skill is fixed, and isn't computed like the other FX specialty skills.
For Arcane Magic and Super

Step 2: Determine the Quality Every FX specialty skill is rated as Ordinary, Good, or Amazing. You've
determined what you want the specialty skill to accomplish; now you have to consult Table G70 or Table G71.1f you're using Table G71, add

up the cost of each of its characteristics to get the total base cost. This
number is the cost for @ hero to pur-
chase the specialty skill at rank 1
Remember, the total base cost also determines the specialty skill's
quality, as noted above. No specialty
skill can have a total base cost of more than 15 skill points.
Be wary of designing a specialty skill that has a permanent effect or an especially long duration. With the exceplions of miracles and magics that actually change the nature of substances (making water into wine, multiplying food stores, etc.), FX of a permanent nature should be rare.
Step
Add FX Trappings Trappings make an FX come alive by providing visual cues and roleplaying hooks that can be used in a gaming session. Some trappings are just for color, and that's okay. Others can reduce the cost required to purchase and improve « particular FX
» Arcane Magic trappings add flavor to spellcasting. All arcane spells requite some combination of ritual, word, and will to bring the ef-

Twao victims of cykosis

fect into the natural world.

Word and will are tied together

Ritual includes all preparations and must always be part of the ar-

necessary to cast a spell, including cane ceremony. Word is the actual

making gestures, reading spell-

vocalization of the magical phrase

books, or imagining arcane formulas required to activate the FX, while

in the mind. If a ritual is a simple ac- will provides the energy necessary

tion (can be performed in one phase to alter the natural world in some

as part of a single skill check), it pro- way. Neither of these can be altered,

vides no reduction to the cost of a

s0 have no effect on cost.

spell. The ritual is simply a part of

In addition, an Arcane Magic FX

the specialty skill's flavor.

specialty skill can have two other

It the ritual uses a complex skill

trappings: component and focus

check, requiring a number of success- Component indicates that a par-

es based on the quality of the spell to ticular spell requires an ingredient

cast (see "Complex Skill Checks" in

1o cast. A component should be tied

Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action), 1o its spell in some way and not be a

then the total base cost of the spell is common object. For example, a spell reduged by 1,2, or 3 points. (The com- that permits flight should require the

plex skill check must be of Ordinary feather of an uncommon hawk rather

complexity in order to qualily for the than one from an everyday pigeon. A

L-point reduction.)

character should keep track of the

# Example: Woligang designs

available stock of components, as

spell of Amazing quality with a total base cost of 14. He decides to attach

each use of the spell diminishes this supply. Spells with components have

ritual trappings to the spell, reduc- abase cost reduction of 1 point.

ing its cost from 14 to 11 skill points.

Focus provides another limiting

Now the specialty skill is cheaper, factor on how and when FX can be

but it must be performed as a com- activated. Typical foci include

plex skill check of Amazing complex- staves, wands, crystals, amulets, tal-

ity, requiring 8 fo 10 successes to
complete,

ismans, spell books, cats and other
a2 animal pets, or even another sen-

tient creature. Without a focus, the spell can't be activated. A spell that features this trapping has a 1-point

reduction to its cost.
» Faith trappings are represented

Campaign

Starting

Max

by a relic that serves as a symbol of

tic

5

10

belief and a conduit of spiritual pow- Heroi

10

20

er. Without such a focus, the caster

Super Heraic

15

sulfers a penalty based on the quali-

30

ty of the miracle being prayed for

(+1/+2/43). For example, attempting a
Good miracle without trappings im-
poses a +2 penalty on the Faith FX specialty skill check. The ritual for a miracle is the prayer itseli, which is simple in nature. There are no cost reductions for Faith trappings.
» Super Power trappings vary wildly, but may reduce a skill's base

Starting gives the amount of FX energy that a starting character with FX powers begins with. Later in their careers, characters can increase the amount of FX energy they possess.
Max gives the most FX energy a character can ever have.
Cost gives the skill points needed to purchase an extra point of energy

Each attempted use of an FX specialty skill consumes @ number of FX energy points, depending on the quality of the FX specialty skill and
whether or not the attempt succeeds. Refer to TABLE G73: FX ENERGY COSTS.
Once a character's FX energy falls to 0, no more FX uses can be attempted until the energy is replenished.

cost in some cases. Common cost re-
ducers include a power limitation, a trigger, or a component needed to make a super-science gadget operate. Any of these trappings can provide a cost reduction of 1 point.
Limitations are common items that hinder the onse of certain FX Such an item can add penalties to an FX skill check or prohibit the use of the FX in its presence. Optionally, the item may weaken the character directly; for example, it may reduce an Ability Score for a period of time or cause fatigue or stun damage. Common limitations include specific minerals, frequencies of light or sound, colors, chemical mixtures, water, or specific creatures or plants.
Triggers are conditions that must be met for certain FX skills to be used. For example, a certain skill might only be usable at night, underground, or in the presence of the family pet.
Components are precious miner-
als such as silver or gold, special serums and compounds that take time and resources to prepare, or specific energy sources of limited availability.

to add to the character's permanent
reservoir. For example, a character in a realistic campaign must spend 20 skill points to increase his or her FX energy total from 510 6. Using FX

If a character's FX energy falls below 0, he suffers fatigue damage. For each FX energy point that isn't available to spend, the character suffers | point of fatigue damage. Of course, a character has to have at least 1 point of FX energy to even make an attempt to use an FX skill.

Most FX work just like other skills in

the game. A player can decide that his hero is going to use an FX skill in

Resisting

FX

place of any other action. An FX skill T an FX is directed at another char-
score is equal to the associated Abil- acter, the target may have defenses

ity Score plus the number of ranks

to use against it. Resistance modi-

the character possesses. An FX skill fiers may apply penalties (or a

check has a base situation die of

bonus), as with any other skill use. It

+d0.

all depends on the nature of the FX.

TasLE G73:

Some direct-attack FX forms (Arcane
Magic or Super Power skills) can be
resisted by either Strength or Dexter-

FX Enerey CosTs
Arcane Mag al Failure
Failure Ordinary spell Good spell

ity resistance modifiers. FX forms
that target other aspects of a character can be resisted by other means, as determined by the Gamemaster. In addition, armor can help against
some FX, especially attacks that act
as low impact (LI}, high impact (HI), or energy (En) weapons.

Amazing spell

Wh=Wh

Faith

FX Energy

Critical Failure

Recovery

RSteepcor4d: Information
Record the pertinent information regarding the FX: the FX skills, the

Failure Ordinary miracle Good miracle

hero's, villain's, or alien's FX energy

Amazing miracle

total, and the game effects if the FX
skill check succeeds.

Super Powe Critical Failure

FX Energy

Failure Ordinary power

28 How often you allow characters to demonstrate incredible FX powers depends on the tone of your cam-

Good power Amazing power

paign. Refer to TABLE G72 FX ENERGY.

W
-

Aheros FX energy loss reflects how much "inner strength" he has to power his FX skills. If this strength runs out, FX can't be used until he recovers some of his FX energy.
FX energy points for Arcane Magic or Super Power skills are recovered atarate of 1, 2, or 3 per hour, based on the result of a Will feat check ora Resolve-mental resolve skill check: Critical Failure, lose another FX energy point (suffer 1 point of fatigue damage if no points are available);

Failure, no recovery this hour; Ordi
nary, recover | point; Good, 2 points; Amazing, 3 points. No recovery occurs during an hour in which & character tries to use FX. If a character spends a full eight hours resting and not attempting to use FX, all FX energy points are recovered (unless you have a story reason to keep a hero, villain, or alien exhausted).
For Faith, the recovery process is
abit different. The character must
actively worship and pray for the recovery of FX energy--recharging a spiritual battery. Part of every day must be spent in prayer and meditation. At the end of the day, FX energy
points areyecovered atarate of 1,2,
or 3 points based on the result of a Will feat check or @ Resolve-mental resolve skill check. No recovery occurs during a day in which a character attempt to use Faith FX. If the faithful character achieves a Critical
Failure result, he has somehow lost
his way and must perform some form
of penance before he can once again
begin recovering FX energy.
Some FX
Examples
Here are examples of each kind of FX described in this section. Players
and Gamemasters are encouraged to create any FX they feel will fit into «and improve their campaigns. Included in each description are the `point costs related to the design of the specialty skill.
Fate Casting
Arcane Magic, Augur spell: WIL; Good quality, base cost 6
This spell determines the possible fate of a character within the next 24 `hours (6 pts); provides general infor`mation (3 pts); and requires the casting of runestones (-1 pt) over the
course of a skill check of Good com-
plexity (-2 pts).
Bolt of Lightning
Arcane Magic, Conjure spell: WIL; Good quality, base cost §
`This spell aims a bolt of lightning at an target (energy attack, 3 pts). It inflicts Ordinary damage (0 pts) of dds/ddw/d4+2w (low stun, 1 pt; low
wound, 2 pts). The bolt's range is
2/4/6 meters (2 pts). Trappings are a wood shavings from a lightningstruck tree (<1 pt) and a skill check of
Good complexity (-2 pts).

Fly
Arcane Magic, Summon spell: WIL; Good quality, base cost 9
This spell allows the caster to fly {6 pts) at a rate equal to his fly movement rate (see TABLE P8: CoMBAT

ter has a durability rating of 6/6/3.

D Once the eagle is knocked uncon-
scious or runs out of mortal points,

--o

the character returns to his normal

form; the damage suffered in the

eagle's form remains when the char-

Hand- MoVEMENT RATES in the Player's acter transforms back to normal.

`book). This flight lasts for 2 minutes (4 pts). It requires G component of soap bubbles (-1 pt) and a simple

Cloak of Invisibility
Super Power, Relic: DEX; Amazing

skill check.

quality, base cost 12

16HO0ILdO

When the word of power is spo-

Enchant Weapon

ken, the cloak turns its wearer invis-

Arcane Magic, Transform spell:
PER: Amazing quality, base cost 11 `This spell temporarily bestows

ible. While activated, it provides a -3
bonus (7 pts) to all Stealth checks STINH and adds +2 to the resistance modi-

magical qualities upon an ordinary fiers of the caster for any attacks that

weapon, making it more potent in

require seeing the target (5 pts).

Strength the battle, It provides a 3-point bonus to
damage inflicted by the weapon (6

of

pts), and the weapon remains en-

Behemoth

chanted for 3 minutes (6 pts). Casting Super Power, Extreme Ability: CON;

requires a component of silver dust

Good quality, base cost 8

sprinkled over the item (-1 pt) and a

This power increases the charac-

simple skill check to activate.

ter's Strength score by as much as 3

(10 pts) for as long as the FX energy

Divine Guidance Faith, Ordinary miracle: WIL; Ordi-
nary quality, base cost 5
With this miracle, the character

lasts. Every round, this power uses up 2 points of FX energy. An FX check is required to activate the power; degree of success indicates

prays for advice concerning a partic- the actual Strength increase

ular course of action--*Should we

{+1/+2/+3). This FX has a limitation:

enter the alien structure?" or "Should In the cold (0° Celsius or less), the Tturn over the data disk to the gov- check is made with a +1 penalty (-1

emment official?" The answer comes PO

in the form of a feeling or sense ot the rightness or wrongness of an action. The guidance is equivalent to
general knowledge.

Web Spinneret
Super Power, Overscience gadget: DEX; Ordinary quality, base cost 2
`The web spinneret is an over-

Divine Blessing

science device worn around the

Faith, Good miracle: WIL; Good quality, base cost 10
When this prayer is answered, the
`miracle worker causes a divine
agency to bestow a blessing. This blessing takes the form of a -1 bonus to the group's action checks and adds +1 1o the group's resistance
modifiers for the duration of the mir-

character's wrist. It consists of car-
tridge cylinders, a touch-activated firing mechanism, and a high-powered compressor that expels chemical webbing from a nozzle. When activated, the web spinneret fires @ line of superstrong, ultrathin material that sticks to a distant object. The webline can be used to swing across

acle. The blessing remains in effect
for 2 rounds.

open spaces, aid Athletics--climb
skill checks, or stop falls. The cost is 1 FX energy point per use or per 10

Song of the Eagle

meters of line expelled. The line has

Faith, Amazing miracle: WIL; Amaz- a range of 10/20/30 meters (4 pts),

ing quality, base cost 15 This prayer is answered by chang-
ing the miracle worker into an eagle
for 1 hour. As an eagle, the character retains his own Intelligence and

with a +2 and +3 penalty for medium and long range attempts. An FX skill check is required to activate; when FX energy is exhausted, the web material must be replenished, which re-

`memories, though he interacts with quires a Technical Science-repair

the world as an eagle would--he can skill check of Good complexity (-2

1ly, screech, and hunt, and has excel-
lent vision. As an eagle, the charac-

pts). The webline has an effective
Strength score of 16.

&

g

dangerous businesses: Dashing

agents get thrown into pits full of allig

treasure-seekers attract the attention of sharks, great

cats, and angry natives as they go about thei

`corporate agents often run afoul of securif

ls

and attack dogs. This chapter describes a few of the

types of creatures that might pose a threat to heroes

over the course of a campaign.

AnvAL &

however, roll d6 and add the result to 12 to create an individualized great

ALIEN STATISTICS

ape, This particular ape would have aStrength score between 13 and 18.
Ingeneral, a creature's Ability

The animals and nonhumanoid
gliens described in this chapter have
the same kinds of game statistics as heroes do--figures such as Ability Scores, resistance modifiers, and skill scores. However, they don't o `ways "play by the rules" in terms of Ł siatistics thatare derived from other values.
For instante, we've given the

Scores can be used as a basis for comparing the creature to @ human;
for instance, a typical great ape is
stronger than the strongest normal buman (whose STR can't be higher tham 14) But the comparison dossn't always hold true when you consider how a creature is capable of using its Abilifies--just because & horse has a Dexterity of 10 doesn't mean

mule o Strength scote of 14 and a Dexterityof 10. It does damage by kdcking, a form of attack that is related to both Strength and Dexterity, butits attack succeeds only on are. sultof §or lower. Don't be surprised when you see apparent inaccuracies such as these in the descriptions that foliow--some nunibers axe purposeIy modified to yield-a clearer pictre of what a certain type of creature is like.

it's- more agile than an average
`human, who has a Dexterity of 9. Always take into account the nature of acreature when determining what its Ability Scores enable it to accom-
plish.
Intelligence and Personality are treated differently: for these Abilities, the number range in parentheses is preceded by the word "Animal." This value is an indicator of the creature's level of ability in reIation to other animals. For instance,

Ability Scores

dogs are smart animals--they can
solve mazes, recognize when a

In the statistical summaries that follow, sach animaland alien is given asingle value foreach Ability Score. These numbers describe typical creature of the type. In addition, o number rangs is given in parenthe-
ses alongside each typical score.
This range, represented by a die roll added 1o a constant.allows you to create individual creatures with Ability Scores thatmay be higher or lower than their species' average.
For example. the typical greatape has a Strength Score-of 16. Youcould,

human is angry, and use effective pack tactics when attacking prey in the wild. But it's ludicrous to assign a typical dog higher Intelligence score than a slow-witted human.
Thus, the entry for a dog''s Intelligence s "INT 3 (Animal 11 or d4+9)." This means that no dog is as intelligent as a human, but the typical dog
hicis an effective Intelligence score of
whenattempting lo do something Intelligence-related thatan animal is capable of--negotiatea-maze, understand o simple command, use a

sound or a gesture to communicate some information. (If you want, you can roll d4 and add 9 to the result to determine this statistic for a part lar dog.)
Personality works much the same
way for nonsentient animals. Socia ble animals have a high Personality
score to reflect the fact that they
work well with each other. But on the human scale, these animals' Person-
ality scores don't exceed 2 or 3. Additionally, animals are ex-
tremely limited in their use of en. counter skills; while it's conceivable
that a dog might intimidate someone
with a growl, or convince a hero to follow it to its trapped master with a successful Intelligence or Personality feat check, it makes a lot more sense for you to dispense with game mechanics in such situations: Let the players decide if their heroes where the dog wants them to go.
Attacks and
Defenses
An animal's or alien's preferred form(s) of attack and innate defenses appear in this section. Use a +d0 base situation die on a check to see if an attack succeeds, Predators natwrally have higher attack scores and damage ratings than herbivores and nonaggressive animals. Adju nents for Strength are already included in the damage figures.
`The attack scores listed pertain to
a typical creature of the species; if you create a creature whose Strength
or Dexterity is higher or lower than
al the average, adjust the attack scores
and damage ratings accordingly.

17Skills Most animals and alien creatures possess a short list of

F

N

broad skills (and in many cases, a specialty skill or two) that work much like a hero's skills. These represent the

innate abilities that an animal or alien creature possess-

es; unlike humans or intelligent aliens, animals can't

ALIENS learn new skills or improve their scores in existing skills. A number in brackets represents the creature's score in the broad skill or specialty skill that was just mentioned.

Ł

For instance, the skill list for the great ape begins with

"Athletics [16)-climb (18]." This means that the creature

has a score of 16 for skill checks related to the Athletics

broad skill, and a score of 18 for skill checks that involve

climbing (which is the same as saying the creature has

rank 2 in the climb specialty). For a particular ape with a

Strength score other than 16, these scores would be ad-

CREATURES justed up or down as necessary.

Animals Combat
Animals don't attack just because a human crosses their path. Rather, these creatures attack because they're frightened, angered, startled, or (in rare cases) hungry. Unless an animal is actively hunting for a meal, it engages in some kind of display designed to warn the hero ofi--such as growling, bluffing a charge, beating its chest, and so on.
1f an animal does stalk a hero, it attempts to use Stealth in order to surprise the hero. This is a natural tactic of predators everywhere--the closer a predator gets before its prey notices, the better its chances of killing the
unsuspecting creature.
When an animal attacks a human, it naturally ries to close with the victim. A large animal's first attack, for example, is often an attempt to knock its human target flat, so that it can easily bite and claw its prey. Refer to the "Overpowering" section on page 43 in Chapter 3: Game`masters in Action for more detail. An animal with several atlack options can often try one of each (biting and clawing, for example) as a single action.
Fow animals fight to the death. Once an animal suffers substantial wound damage--or even if it fails its initial attack--it's likely to break off the fight and move away. Of course, there are always exceptions. Creatures such as crocodiles and sharks sometimes lack the ability to realize that they've been mortally wounded, and bad-tempered predators such as grizzly bears might lapse into a
state of rage as part of a show of resistance.

Ape, Great

STR 16 DEX 10

(dB+12) (d+7)

INT3

TAnimal 11 or d6+8)

WIL 14 (dd+12)"

CON16

(d4+13)

PER3

Durability: 16/16/8/8

Move: sprint 40, run 24, walk 8

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

(Animal 10 or d448)
Action check: 14+/13/6/3
#Actions: 3

Attacks Pummel Bite

18/9/4 dB+ds/dB+2wi2dds2w LUO 16/8/4 dd+ls/ddwlddslw LIO

Defenses
+3 resistapce modifier vs. melee attacks
+1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d4-2 (L1), none (HI), d4-2 (En)

Skills
Athletics [16}-climb [18); Movement [16]; Stamina [16}-en-
durance [18]; Awareness (14-intuition {17}, perception
{15]; Investigate [14}-search [15]; Resolve [14].

Great apes include gorillas and orangutans. In the wild,
they avoid man and only attack if startled or harassed. These animals are enormously strong and make use of overpowering (see Chapter 3) if pushed into a fight.

Baboon

STRI2 (d4+10) INT3 (Animal 10 or dd+8)

DEX12 (d4+10) WIL1L (d4+9)

CON8 (d6+5) PERS (Animal 12 or dd+10)

Durability: 8/8/4/4

Action check: 14+/13/6/3

Move: sprint 48, run 28, walk 8

#Actions:3

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Attacks
Bite

W73 dds+2sldd+1widd+3w Lo

Defenses +2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d4-1 (LI), none (HI), d4-2 (En)

Skills Athletics [12]-climb [14); Acrobatics [12]; Stamina [8}-en-
durance [14]; Awareness [11}-intuition (14], perception [12]; Investigate [11}-search [12]; Resolve [11].

ANIMAL COMPENDIUM

Baboons can be extremely dangerous animals. They are aggressive and intelligent, and travel in troops number-

The material that follows is by no means @ complete list-
ing of every dangerous creature, but it contains enough information for you to get started, and serves as a guide

ing in the dozens. A single animal is more than a match for an adult human, and unlike other primates, baboons don't always avoid confrontations with groups of humans.

to designing creatures specific to your setting. For ex-

ample. a cougar is basically a great cat that's smaller

Bear

than a jaguar or a leopard, so you can use the description for "Cat, great" and reduce the animal's Strength and Constitution scores a bit. Similarly, you can use the stats

STR 1S DEX 8

(d4+12) (d4+6)

INT2 WIL 14

(Animal 8 or dd+6) (d4+12)

for "Shark" to create a smaller canivorous fish such as a CON16 (2d4+10)

PER2

(Animal 6 or d4+4)

banracuda--scale back Strength and Constitution somewhat, add a few points of Dexterity, and change the resis-
1) tance modifier vs. ranged attacks to +2 or +3 to reflect the smaller creature's improved dodging ability.

Durability: 24/24/12/12 Move: sprint 50, run 36, walk 8 Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Action check: 12+/11/5/2 #Actions: 3

Attacks Bite
Claws

16/8/4 ddwld6+1w/d6+3w LVO
16/8/4 d6+1s/dd+1w/dB+2w Lo

Defenses +3 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d6 (LI), d4-1 (HI), d6-1 (En)

Skills Athletics [18]; Stamina [16}-endurance [20); Awareness [14}-intuition (17]; Investigate [14}-search (15], track [1]; Resolve [14}-physical resolve [17].

This entry describes a large brown bear, or possibly a small grizzly. A polar bear o a large grizely would have an even higher Strength score and cause more damage with its attacks. Given a chance, most bears will avoid humans. Bears are more likely to atiack because they've been startled than because they're hungry.

Buffalo

STR15 (2d4+10)

INT 2

(Animal 6 or d4+4)

DEX6

(d4+4)

WIL 9

(d4+7)

CON14 (2d4+10)

PER3

(Animal 11 or d4+9)

Durability: 21/21/10/10

Action check: 9+/8/4/2

Move: sprint 46, run 30, walk 6

#Actions: 2

Reaction score: Marginal/l (Charge: Good/1)

Attacks

Charge

13/6/3 d8+ls/d12+1s/dBw

Lo

Goreltoss

13/6/3 d6s/d6+2s/dbw

Lo

Defenses
+3 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d6-1 (LI), d4-2 (HI), d6-2 (En)

Skills Movement [14); Stamina (14); Awareness [9)-intuition [12]; Resolve [9].

Defenses

+3 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

+2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

Armor: d4-1 (LI), none (HI), d4-1 (En)

=

Skills
Athletics [14}-climb [15], jump [15]; Acrobatics [12}-fall
[16]; Stealth [12}-sneak [15], shadow (15}; Stamina [12}-endurance [16]; Awareness [12}-intuition [14]; Resolve (12].

Great cats include predators such as lions, tigers, jaguars, leopards, panthers, and cougars. In the wild, they tend to avoid groups of humans, but it's not uncommon for
agreat cat to attack a solitary human. The statistics above describe a medium-sized jungle
cat--a jaguar or a leopard; lions and tigers are larger and
`more powerful, possessing higher Strength and Constitu- =
tion scores, as well as causing an additional 1 or 2 points of damage.

Crocodile

STR 14 (d4+11)

INT1

{Animal 4 or dd+2)

DEX9

(d4+8)

`WIL 10 {dd+7)

CON14

(2d4+11)

PER 1

(Animal 5 or d4+3)

Durability: 14/14/7/7

Action check: 12+/11/5/2

Move: sprint 30, run 20, walk 4, swim 18

#Actions: 3

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Attacks

Bite

15/7/3 d4+1w/d6+2w/d4m

Lo

Tail lash

8/4/2 d4s/dd+2s/d8+1s

Lo

Defenses
+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d6+1 (LI), d6-1 (HI), d4 (En)

Skills Stealth [9}-hide [11], sneak [12); Stamina [14}-endurance (18], resist pain [16]; Awareness [10}-intuition (12]; Resolve
110--physical resolve [12].

Any wild Earth bovine such as the bison, the water buffao, or the Cape buffalo of South Africa is represented by this entry. Different species vary in temperament and aggressiveness; most wild bulfalo go out of their way to avoid humans, but some might stand their ground or charge if they are harassed. The bufalo begins fight by mounting a powerful charge, after which it tries fo trample or gore the offending creature.

Cat, Great

STR 14 (d4+12)

INT 2

DEX 12 (d4+10)

WIL 12

CON12

(d4+10)

PER3

Durability: 12/12/6/6

Move: sprint 60, run 36, walk 12

Reaction score: Good/2

(Animal 9 or d4+7) (d4+10) {Animal 10 or 2d4+5) Action check: 14+/13/6/3
#Actions: 3

Crocodiles attack by dragging prey underwater and drowning it. A crocodile will almost always try to overpower its chosen target with ts first attack and drag it into deeper water. The animal can only use its tail lash
against a target standing behind it.

Dog, Attack

STR11 (d4+9)

INT3

{Animal 11 or d4+9)

DEX 11 (dd+9)

WIL 12 (d4+10)

CONY (d4+7) PER3 (Animal 11 or dé+9)

Durability: 9/9/5/5

Action check: 14+/13/6/3

Move: sprint 56, run 36, walk 10

#Actions: 3

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Attacks Bite

19/6/3 d6s/ddwldds2w Lo

Attacks

Defenses

Bite

15/7/3 ddw/d6+1w/ddm

Lo

+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

Claws

17/8/4 dd+ls/dd+1w/d6+1w

Lo

+1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

Armor: d4-2 (LD), none (HI), none (En)

3

Skills Stealth (11}-shadow [12]; Movement [9)-race [10]; Stamina [Sk-endurance [12]; Awareness [12}-intuition [15], percep-
tion [13]; Investigate [12}-track (16); Resolve [12}-physical resolve [13].
Attack dogs are large, well-trained police animals. Most are trained to overpower fleeing humans and bite their
arms and legs to keep their opponents off balance. It's
possible to train such canines in the use of deadly force.

Mule

STR 14 (d6+10)

INT 2

{Animal 8 or d4+86)

DEX 10 (d4+8)

WIL 12 (d4+9)

CON14 il

(2d4+9)

PER3

(Animal 9 or d4+7)

Action check: 114/10/5/2

Move: sprint 40, run 30, walk 12 Reaction score: Marginal/l

#Actions: 2

Attacks

Kick

8/4/2 dbs/déw/dd+1w

Lo

Elephant

Defenses

STR22 (2d4+17)

INT3

DEX 4

(d4+1)

WIL 11

CON18 (2d4+13)

PER3

Durability: 27/27/13/13

Move: run 24, walk 6

Reaction score: Marginal/l

Attacks

(Animal 11 or d4+9) (d4+9) (Animal 13 or dd+11)

+2resistance modifier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d6-3 (L), none (HI), d6-3 (En)

Action check: 10+/9/4/2 Skills #Actions: 2 Athletics [14]; Movement [14); Stamina [14}-endurance (18]

Acrobatics [10}-balance (11); Awareness [12-intuition [14);

Resolve [12}-physical resolve (16].

Trample

11/5/2 2d6s/2d4+1w/2d6+2w

LG

Defenses
+5 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks -1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d6+1 (LI), d6-1 (HI), d6 (En)

While a mule isnt as strong or as fast as a horse, its a much better pack animal. A mule can negotiate a difficult trail that @ horse might not even attempt. Scorpion

Skills Movement [18); Stamina (18); Awareness [11}-intuition (15}, perception [12]; Resolve [11]-physical resolve (14).

STR2 DEX 14 CON 3 Durability:

(d4+0) (d4+12) (d4+1) 3/3/2/0

INT 1 WIL8 PER1

(Animal 8 or d4+1) (d4+46)
(Animal 3 or dd+1) Action check: 14+/13/6/3

Move: run 20, walk 10
A rampaging elephant can give even the most combative Reaction score: Ordinary/2

#Actions: 2

of heroes a cause for concern. Domesticated elephants are unlikely o turn on humans unless they are gravely

Attacks

mistreated. Elephants in the wild, however, may charge Sting humans who come too close to the herd.

8/4/2 1s/ls/ls

Lo

plus poison (see text)

Defenses

Horse

STR 16 (d6+12)

INT 2

DEX 10 (da+4)

WILS

CON14

(2d4+9)

PER3

Durability: 14/14/7/7

Move: sprint 60, run 36, walk 12

Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 7 or d4+5)
(dd+7) (Animal 8 or d4+7)
Action check: 9+/8/4/2 #hctions: 2

Attacks
Trample

8412 dB+1s/ddw/dd+2w LVO

Defenses +2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks
no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d6-3 (LI, none (HI), d6-3 (En)
Skills Movement (14]; Stamina [14}-endurance [16; Awareness [12]. (Sk-intuition [10}; Resolve [3}-physical resolve

+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +2resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: none (LI), none (HI), none (En)
Skills Stealth (14]-hide [16], sneak [16]; Stamina [3}-endurance [6]; Awareness [8l-intuition [12], perception [10].
Scorpions range in size from creatures no larger than a human's thumbnail to foot-long giants of the Algerian desert. Although a scorpion's sting is rarely fatal, almost all such attacks are excruciatingly painful, See "Poison" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action. Consider the sting of a typical scorpion as an irritant, providing a +3 penalty to the victim's Constitution feat check. Deadly scorpions possess a neurotoxin that provides no modifier to the vic-
tim's Constitution feat check. In either case, the onset
time is 2 rounds and the poison's duration is 12 hours.
Shark

This animal is a typical riding horse. A draft horse or war horse is slightly larger and more powertul, but slower. Wild horses and trained war horses have better attack score (14/7/3).
AL

STR 15 (2d4+10)

INT2

DEX 8

(d4+6)

WILS

CON14

(dd+12)

PER |

Durability: 14/14/7/7

Move: swim 60

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

(Animal 5 or d4+3)
(dd4+7) (Animal 4 or d4+2) Action check: 12+/11/5/2
#Actions: 3

Attacks

Attacks

Bite

16/8/4 d6+2w/d8+3w/dd+2m

Lo

Bite

1263 1s/lwiddw

LIo

Defenses

plus poison (see text)

+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks
+1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d (LD), d4-1 (HI), d4+1 (En) Skills

Detenses +1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d4-1 (L), none (HI), d4-2 (En)

Movement [14); Stamina [14}-endurance [18]; Awareness

Skills

(8)-perception [12]; Resolve [S}-physical resolve [12].
Like many other creatures, sharks come in a variety of sizes and shapes. A number of species are basically `harmless to man, but these aren't the types of sharks that show up in roleplaying scenarios: usually when the heroes deal with a shark, they face a hungry man-eater. Use
the statistics above to reflect large hammerheads, tiger
sharks, or even makos or blue sharks.

Stealth [10}-hide [16]; Stamina (8l-endurance {12]; Aware-
ness [10]; Resolve [10}-physical resolve {12]. The snake described is a good-sized rattlesnake or cobra, 2103 meters in length. Depending on the species, the snake's poison is either a hemotoxin (rattlesnake) or neurotoxin (cobra); see "Poison" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action for details. Snake venom is insinuative, which means that a snake must penetrate a victim's armor and

inflict primary damage for the poison to affect the target.

Snake, Constrictor

The potency of the toxin affects the victim's Constitution feat check to resist the poison. Depending on the

STR14 (d8+10) INT2 (Animal 5 or d4+3) snake, the moditier to this check ranges from a -2 bonus

DEX 8

(d4+6)

WIL 10 (d4+8)

1o a +4 penalty. Big rattlers possess venom with a +1

CON10 (dd+8)

PER1 (Animal 4 or d4+2)

penalty, while large cobras have poison with a +3 penal-

Durability: 10/10/5/5

Action check: 10+/9/4/2 ty. The onset time is anywhere from 1 to 10 minutes, and

Move: walk 14, swim 20
Reaction score: Marginal/l

#Actions: 2 the duration varies widely depending on the snake.

Attacks

Whale, Humpback

Constrict

15/7/3 d6+ls/dd+lw/dd+3w Lo

STR 22 (2d4+17) INT 4 (Animal 13 or dd+11)

Defenses +2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

DEX4 (d4+2) WIL16 (d4+13)

CON20' (2d6+13) PER4 (Animal 13 or d4+11)

Durability: 30/30/15/15

Action check: 7+/6/3/1

Move: swim 40

#Actions: 2

Armor: d4 (LI), d4-2 (HI), d4-1 (En)

Reaction score: Marginal/l

Skills

Attacks

Stealth [8}-hide [12]; Stamina [10}-endurance [14); Aware- Ram

ness [10]; Resolve [10)-physical resolve [14].

Tail slap

10/5/2 d8+1s/d12+2s/dd+2w LG 10/5/2 d6s/d8+1s/d1242s LUG

Pythons, boas, anacondas, and similar snakes fall into this classification. Only the largest constrictors (5 meters or more in length) are dangerous to adult humans.
During its attack, a constrictor ries to overpower its
victim (see "Overpowering" in Chapter 3) in order to gain

Defenses
Good toughness
+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks ~1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d8 (L), d6 (HI), d8 (En)

ahold on the target. After it secures its victim, the con-

strictor tightens its coils. The snake gains a -2 bonus on Skills

subsequent attacks made against an individual ensnared Movement [20}; Stamina [20; Awareness [16]-intuition 18],

by its coils--but other opponents get a -2 bonus on at-

perception [18]; Resolve [16].

tacks against the snake while it's holding a victim. A

trapped victim has a +2 penalty on any attempt to break

Whales are the largest animals in Earth's biosphere. The

free using an opposed Strength feat check against the

mighty blue whale tips the scales at over 100 tons, but the

snake's Strength.

humpback is a much smaller animal--rarely weighing

more than 25 tons. Due to their size, whales resist damage

Snake, Venomous

as Good targets, causing damage from Ordinary weapons to be downgraded against them.

STR8 (dd+6)

INT2

(Animal § or d4+3)

Whales are quite intelligent (for animals); they commu-

DEX10 (dd+8)

WIL 10 (d4+8)

nicate by "singing," emitting sounds that carry for dozens

CON8 (d4+8)

PER1 (Animal 4 or dd+2)

of kilometers under the right conditions. Most whales

Durability: 8/8/4/4

Action check: 13+/12/6/3 avoid humans, but if heroes manage to make a humpback

Move: run 24, walk 10
Reaction score: Ordinary/l

#Actions: 2 mad at them, the animal attacks like a living battering ram. An angry whale can easily wreck a small boat.

35

ALIEEN COMPENDIUM

b `This section describes a number of generic alien creature types to help set the stage for a science fiction game. You

can use these entries or disregard them as you wish.

fiS

While it's absurd to assume that every alien world has creatures corresponding to wolves, bears, or tigers, its

ALInot too far-fetched to assume that a particular world has one or two creatures that ill similar ecological niches.

Ł

These alien entries are deliberately vague. You should

decide the details about a specific creature of any type--

such as appearance, hunting methods, habitat, and voraciousness. Take these basic statistics and exercise your

imagination to populate your worlds with all kinds of

ITURES dangerous critters!

Amphibian

STR 1§ (d4+12)

INT1

DEX 8

(d4+5)

WIL8

CON17 (d4+15)

PER1

Durability: 17/17/9/3

Move: run 20, walk 4, swim 20

Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 4 or d4+2) (d4+5) (Animal 4 or d4+2) Action check: 9+/8/4/2
#Actions: 2

Attacks Tongue Bite

8/4/2 dds/dd+1s/d4+2s

Lo

13/6/3 d4+2w/dB+3w/d4m

Lo

Attacks

Bite

12/6/3 d4-2s/dds/dd-lw.

LIo

Pplus poison (see text)

Defens:

+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

+3 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

Armor: d4+1 (LI), d4-2 (HI), d4-2 (En)

Skills Athletics [7}--climb [16], jump [14]; Stealth (15}-hide [18], sneak [16]; Stamina [6}-endurance [10); Awareness [10}-intuition [12]; Resolve [10].

Alien arachnids are larger and more dangerous versions of Earth spiders. The typical arachnid weighs about 20 kg, and its body is the size of a small dog's. The creature described here resembles a giant wolf spider, a leaper that springs on unsuspecting heroes with bounds of up to 10 meters.
The alien arachnid possesses powerful fangs capable of injecting a lethal venom. lis poison combines the effects of & paralytic agent and a necrotoxin, inflicting +2 penalty to the victim's Constitution feat check to resist the toxin. The onset time for the poison is 2 rounds, and its duration is 2 hours (see "Poison" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action). The bite must cause at least 1 point of damage in order for the poison to take effect.

De!

Arthropod

+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks
no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

STR4 DEX 15

(da+1) (2d4+10)

INT1 WIL8

(Animal 3 or d4+1) (d6+5)

Armor: d4 (LI), d4-2 (HI), d4-1 (En)

CON2

(d4+0)

PER1

(Animal 3 or d4+1)

Durability: 2/2/1/1

Action check: 15+/14/7/3

Skills Stealth [8]-hide (10); Stamina [17}-endurance [18]; Aware-

Move: walk 6, {ly 60 Reaction score: Good/l

#Actions: 2

ness [8]-intuition [10); Resolve [8]-physical resolve [14].

Attacks

The alien amphibian is a slow-moving, primitive predator the size of a large crocodile. It may appear froglike or salamanderlike, or may even resemble a legless, eellike creature. It hunts from the concealment of muddy rivers or
bogs, using its sticky tongue to snare careless creatures

Bite

10/52 d4-1s/d4-2widdw

Lo

plus blood drain (see text)

Defenses

no resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

+4 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

that venture too close.

Armor: none (LD), none (HI), none (En)

The alien's tongue has a range of 6 meters; if the am-

phibian makes a successful Dexterity feat check,

Skills

licts the listed damage and snares its victim as indicated Acrobatics [15}-light [16); Stamina (2}-endurance [4];

by the degree of success of the attack (see "Overpower- Awareness [Bl-intuition [12]; Investigate [8}-track [12); Re-

ing" in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action). In the next

solve (8]

phase, the victim is drawn to the creature's mouth unless

it can match or exceed the amphibian's degree of success This alien resembles a dragonly of alarming proportions.

on a Strength feat check. If the amphibian can't draw its Tis body is as long as a man's forearm, and it pursues

victim to its mouth, or if its tongue is damaged by any at- warm-blooded prey relentlessly. Like many biting flies, it

tack, the creature lets go. The amphibian gains a -2 bo-

regards humans as food. The creature would be little

nus to bite any victim snared by its tongue.

more than a nuisance, except that it's often encountered

in swarms of hundreds--though only four or five arthro-

Arachnid

pods can attack any single target in a single round. If the creature's bite causes at least 1 point of wound

STR7

(d4+4)

INT1

(Animal 3 or d4+1)

damage, the animal inserts a feeding tube into the wound

DEX 15 (2d4+10)

`WIL 10 (d6+7)

and begins to suck blood, causing 1 additional point of

CON 6 (d4+3)

PER1

(Animal 3 or d4+1)

wound damage per round. It continues feeding until

Durability: 6/6/3/3

Action check: 17+/16/8/4 pulled off, killed, or sated by consuming 3 wound points'

Move: run 50, walk 10, (jump 10)

#Actions: 2 `worth of blood. A hero might dislodge the creature by

a6 Reaction score: Good/2

using insecticide,
asmoky fire.

jumping into a lake, or getting

close

fo

Avian

STR8 (dB+5)

INT2

(Animal 7 or d4+5)

DEX15 (d6+12) WIL1L (d4+9)

CON 6 (dd+4)

PER 2 (Animal 6 or d4+4)

Durability: 6/6/3/3 Move: walk 10, fly 100
Reaction score: Good/2

Action check: 15+/14/7/3 #Actions: 3

Attacks

Talons

12/8/3 dds/ddw/dd+lw

Lo

Beak

1052 d4-1s/ddsidéw

Lo

Defenses
+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +3 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d4-1 (LD, none (HI), d4-1 (En)

humans, but if startled or harassed it's likely to respond with a devastating charge. After its initial charge, the creature tries to gore, toss, or trample any individuals remaining in the vicinity.

Canine

STR12

(dd+10)

INT4

DEX 10 (d4+8)

WIL 14

CON10 (d4+8)

PER3

Durability: 10/10/5/5

Move: sprint 70, run 40, walk 10

Reaction score: Good/2

(Animal 13 or d4+11) (d4+12) (Animal 11 or d4+9) Action check: 15+/14/7/3
#Actions: 3

Attacks Bite Spines

15/7/3 d6+1s/d6w/d6+3w

Lo

10/5/2 d4-2s/dd4-2w/d4-1w

Lo

Skills
Acrobatics [15Hlight {17]; Stealth [15]; Stamina [B}-endurance [11]; Awareness [11]-intuition (13, perception
[12]. 117]; Resolve [11}-physical resolve

Defenses
+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: d4 (LI), d4-2 (HI), d4-1 (En)

The avian s « large, birdlike predator comparable to a golden eagle in size and temperament. Its unlikely to attack large groups of humans unless its nest or lair is endangered--although small humans or wounded characters might attract a hungry avien's attention.
When the avian attacks, it swoops silently at its prey from great altitudes, gaining a -2 bonus to its initial Stealth skill check and its first attack. It can only strike
with its talons in this swoop, but in subsequent rounds it
can use both its talons and its beak. The avian fights from the air and is able to make attacks from different direc-
tions each time it has an action.

Skills Stealth [10}-sneak [12], shadow [12]; Movement [10}-race [14]; Stamina [10}-endurance (14]; Awareness [14}-intu-
ition [18], perception [16); Investigate [14}-track (20); Re-
solve (14}-physical resolve {15].
Canines are fast, intelligent, medium-sized carnivores
with a developed social organization. As pack hunters, they're aggressive and dangerous, even to well-armed
groups of humans. The alien canine is a canny hunter
that uses sophisticated driving and ambush tactics; each pack member operates in synchronization with the others.

Atypical pack may include ten to twenty members.

Bovine

STR17 (2d4+12)

INT2

(Animal 7 or d4+5)

Although the physical details may vary from world to world, a predator of this type generally has a long, powerful body, a large mouth full of sharp teeth, and blinding

DEX & (dd+4)

WIL8

(d4+6)

swittness in the hunt. These creatures' shoulders and

CON18

(2d4+13)

PER3

Durability: 27/27/13/13

(Animal 10 or d4+8)
Action check: 10+/9/4/2

backs may sport heavy growths of spines. giving them ef-
fective armor of d4+2 against attacks from behind that

Move: sprint 52, run 30, walk 8

#Actions: 2

Reaction score: Marginal/l (Charge: Good/1)

use low impact (LI) weapons.

Attacks

Charge

15/7/3 dB+2s/d12+2s/d8+2w

LG

Gore/trample

15/7/3 dBs/dBw/d6+2w

Lo

Defenses
+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks 1o resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks (En) Armor: d6+2 (LI), d4 (HI), d6

Skills Movement [18]; Stamina (18}-endurance [20]; Awareness
[8)-intuition [10]; Resolve (8].

Bovines aren't merely cows; their family includes much more formidable animals such as buffalo and wild catile. The alien bovine fills a similar ecological niche to its Earth counterpart. Its large grazer weighing more than one ton. Bovines have tough hides or chitinous armor, as well as a rack of hons, and large slashing tusks.
The grazer typically moves away from large groups of

Coelenterate

STR4

(d4+2)

INT1

DEX 8

(d4+6)

WILE

CON 6 (d4+4)

PER1

Durability: 6/6/3/3

Move: swim 16
Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 1)
(dd+4) (Animal 1) Action check: 9+/8/4/2
#Actions: 1

Attacks

Sting (x6)

8/4/2 1s/2s/d4-1w

Lo

Defenses
2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks ~1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks (En) Armor: none (LD), none (HI), none

Skills

Stealth [8}-sneak [10]; Stamina [6}-endurance (10]; Aware-

ness [B}-intuition (10].

a

Coelenterates are represented by the jellyfish, anemones,
and corals of Earth's oceans. They are simple, radially
symmetrical animals armed with dangerous stinging tentacles. The alien coelenterate is a free-swimming creature of the same general type, though it's physically stronger and more durable. A coelenterate has a tough, rubbery body trailed by six major tentacles, a ring of eyedots around its upper surface, and brilliant, phosphorescent markings. It swims using jet propulsion, drawing in water through a hole at the top of its body and expelling it through its open mouth on the opposite side.
The coelenterate is weak and slow by most standards, but each of its tentacles has a long row of stingers equipped with a deadly venom. This venom combines the
effects of a paralytic agent and a neurotoxin (see "Poison"
in Chapter 3: Gamemasters in Action). The onset time is |
round, and the duration of the attack is 6 hours. The creature can only bring two of its tentacles to bear against one human-sized swimmer in a single phase--unless the swimmer is below the alien, so that the target could be enveloped by as many as all six tentacles, or unless multiple targets surround the alien, in which case the creature could use up to two tentacles against each target.

Echinoderm

STR 11 (dd+8)

INT1

DEX §

(d4+2)

WILS

CON10

(d6+7)

PER1

Durability: 10/10/5/5

Move: walk 8, swim 12
Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 4 or d4+2) (d4+6) (Animal 4 or d4+2) Action check: 7+/6/3/1
#Actions: 2

Equine

STR17 (d6+13)

INT3

DEX 8

(d4+6)

WIL11

CON16 (2d4+11)

PER4

Durability: 16/16/8/8

Move: sprint 70, run 40, walk 12
Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 10 or d4+8) (d4+9) (Animal 12 or d4+10) Action check: 10+/9/4/2
#Actions: 2

Attacks

Trample

157/3 d8s/d4+lw/d4+3w

Lo

Tail lash

15/7/3 dds/d6+1s/ddw

Lo

Defenses
+4 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d6-1 (L), d4-1 (HI), d6-1 (En)

Skills
Movement (16}; Stamina [16}-endurance [17); Awareness [1}-intuition [14]; Resolve [11}-physical resolve [14].
The alien equine is large, powerlul herbivore with a horselike build. It has six legs and a long, bladed whip for atail. Its body is covered in large, leathery scales or
plates. Due to the equine's intelligence and herd instincts,
natives of other worlds may domesticate the creature for use as a pack animal, draft animal, or mount.
Most equines will avoid groups of humans, but might attack if startled or harassed. This animal is slightly faster than a mundane horse. It can only employ its tail lash against enemies attacking from the flank or the rear.

Attacks Seize Bite

9/4/2 d4-2s/dds/dd+2s

o

12/6/3 d4wld4+2w/dB+3w

LG

Defenses
+1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks 1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks (En) Armor: d6+2 (LI), d6 (HD), d6-1
Skills
Stealth [5); Stamina [10}-endurance [12]; Awareness [8]-in-
tuition (9]; Resolve [8].
Echinoderms are represented by the starfish, sea stars, sea cucumbers, and urchins of Earth's oceans. The alien echinoderm is a slow-moving predator that resembles a seven-armed starfish more than a meter in diameter. A diving or wading hero might stay in one place long enough for a nearby echinoderm to try to make a meal out of him. These creatures can also remain out of the water for an hour or two. Thus, a character sleeping or resting on a beach might fall prey to one of these aliens.
`When an echinoderm attacks, it tries to seize its prey in
its powerful arms. If the attack succeeds, the prey must defeat the creature on an opposed Strength feat check in order to escape. A successful seize attack brings the creature's mouth, located in the center of its underside, into range of its chosen meal. Unlike Earthly starfish, an alien echinoderm possesses a powerlul triple beak that can bore through light armor with ease. On each subsequent
ALaction, the animal attempts to bite its held prey until the victim dies or the echinoderm is forcibly removed.

Feline

STR 1§ (d4+12)

INT4

(Animal 13 or dd+11)

DEX 1§ (dd+12)

WIL 12 (d4+10)

CON13

(dd+11)

PER 2

{(Animal 8 or 2d4+3)

Durability: 13/13/7/7

Action check: 17+/16/8/4

Move: sprint 80, run 48, walk 12, ump20) #Actions:3

Reaction score: Good/2

Attacks Bite Claws
Tentacles

14/7/3 dd+lw/d+2w/dd+Im LIO

18/9/4 ddw/dd+2w/d6+3w LVO

18/8/4 dBs/ddwid4+2w

Lo

Defenses +3 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +3 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d4 (L), d4-1 (HI), d4 (En)

Skills
Athletics [15}-climb (17, jump (19]; Acrobatics (15}-fall
[18); Stealth [15}-sneak (19], shadow (19]; Stamina (13}-en-
durance [18]; Awareness [12}-intuition [18], perception [14]; Resolve [12].
An alien feline is built along the lines of a great cat. Itsa fast, powerful, large camivore, equipped with deadly claws, fearsome jaws, and a pair of long, barbed tentacles that sprout from its shoulders. The feline is not a social animal; it's rare to encounter more than one at a time.
The feline is a hunter of devilish cunning. It may shadow a party of humans for hours, waiting for one or two

`members to split off from the main group. It attacks from Earths mollusks include snails as well as cephalopods concealment with a great bound, covering up to 20 meters such as octopi and squid. The alien mollusk is an octo-

in a single leap; this leap provides a +1 penalty lo the vic- puslike creature armored with a tough mantle or shell.

tim's Awareness check to avoid surprise--above and be- Unlike its Terran counterparts, the alien mollusk can drag

yond any penalty the feline's own Stealth skill check may itself about on land for short periods of up to § hours. already dictate. Its barbed tentacles have a reach of 4 me- `The alien mollusk has a voracious appetite and isn't

ters; the feline often uses them to knock down, trip, or pin afraid to attack an adult human. It can effectively use an opponent before bringing its claws and teeth into play. four tentacles at one time in combat, preferring to anchor

itself with the rest. The mollusk attempts to overpower

Mantis
STR 10 (dB+7)

INT 2

{Animal 4 or d4+2)

with its tentacle attacks; once it scores a hit with a tenta-
cle, it wraps the limb around the victim and automatically constricts him in each subsequent action. A hero can

DEX 13 (dd+10)

WIL 10 (d4+8)

pull away a constricting tentacle by defeating the mol-

CON12 (d4+10)

PER 1

{Animal 4 or d4+2)

lusk in an opposed Strength feat check (the mollusk gains

Durability: 12/12/6/6
Move: sprint 50, run 30, walk

Action
12, fly 80

check: 14+/13/6/3 #Actions: 2

a1 bonus because of its powerful suckers), or a hero can sever a tentacle by inflicting at least 5 points of wound

Reaction score: Ordinary/l

damage to that limb, (This damage doesn't count against

the mollusks overall durability) Once the mollusk has a

Attacks
Claws (x4) Bite

victim secured with at least one tentacle, it delivers a vi-

12/6/3 d6s/dd+lw/dsw LI/O seetext dd+lw/dS+lwidd+lm LUO

cious bite with its powerful beaked jaws.

Defenses

Nematode

+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

STR7

(dd+4)

INT 1

(Animal 3 or dd+1)

+2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

DEX 14 (2d4+9)

WIL9

(d4+6)

(En) Armor; d6 (LD, d6+2 (HI), d6+1

CONB

(dd+4)

PER1

(Animal 4 or d4+2)

Durability: 6/6/3/3

Action check: 12+/11/5/2

Skills

8 Move: run 24, walk

2 #hActions:

Athletics [10]; Acrobatics [13}-flight [17); Movement [12];

Reaction score: Ordinary/1

Stealth [13}-hide [16]; Stamina [12}-endurance (16]; Aware-

Attacks ness [10}-perception (13]; Resolve [10}-physical resolve (13}. Sting

8472 1s/lwizw

110

This eight-legged, insectoid carnivore hunts alone. When Blood drain

see text 1w per minute

Lo

on the ground it travels using its four back legs for loco-

motion; the front four legs (and their claws) can be held Defens:

out ahead of the creature's body so that it's always ready no resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

to make an attack. The mantis uses its clear, large wings +2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

to engage in flight and attack with surprise from above. Armor: none (LI}, none (HI), none (En)

The creature's four front legs can attack simultaneously (in the same phase), but only against a single target. If Skills

the mantis succeeds on two consecutive claw attacks, it
automatically bites its victim in the current phase.

Stealth [14}-sneak [16]; Stamina [6]-endurance [10];
Awareness (S}-intuition [10]; Investigate [}-track [15); Resolve [9)-physical resolve [12].

Mollusk

STR 13 (dB+10)

INT2

(Animal 6 or d4+4)

The alien nematode is a large, blood-sucking worm about 2 meters long, armed with a paralyzing sting. It lives in

DEX 11 (d4+9)

WIL7

(d4+5)

dank fens or marshlands, emerging at night in search of

CON12

(d4+10)

PER 1

(Animal 4 or d4+2)

warm-blooded prey. Although the worm is sightless, it's

Durability: 12/12/6/6 Move: walk 10, swim 50 Reaction score: Ordinary/l

Action check: 13+/12/6/3 extremely sensitive to vibration and can detect warm#Actions: 2 blooded creatures several hundred meters away.
Typically, the nematode attacks humans while they

sleep. It silently crawls up to a motionless character and

Attacks

Tentacles (x4) 14/7/4 dds/d6+ls/ddw

Bite

1477/4 ddwidd+2w/d6s 1w

LIO LIO

stings with its tail, injecting a fast-acting paralytic agent with an onset time of just | phase. Many victims don't even wake up before they're immobilized. The worm then

Defenses +2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

attaches its soft sucker-mouth to exposed flesh and begins to drain blood at the rate of 1 point of wound damage every § rounds. The nematode can drain 24 points of wound damage before it sates itself and detaches.

Armor: d6+2 (LI), d6+1 (HI), 2d4 (En)

While the nematode's bite kills few healthy adults, the creature instinctively selects weak targets such as

Skills

wounded characters and children. Nematodes tend to

Stealth [11}-hide [18]; Stamina [12}-endurance [16]; Aware- congregate in nests of 3d8 individuals.

ness [7}-intuition {10}, perception (8]; Resolve [7}-physical
resolve [10].

30

-----SOTpRhi1d2ian(d8+8)
B DEX1l (d4+9) CONS (d4s6)

INT2 (Animal G or dd+d) WILLL (d4+9) PERZ (Animal6or dd+d)

formidable attack at its disposal: Like the electric el, a
piscine can generate shocks to stun orincapacitate its
prey. The creature delivers the shock through its long fin-
whips, brushing its feelers against the target from as far as 2 meters away. A piscine can deliver three shocks in

Durability: 8/8/4/4

Action check: 11+/10/5/2

Move: walk 8
Reaction score: Ordinary/2

#Actions: 3

combat scene before it exhausts its electrical reserve.
Primate

ALIENS

&

Attacks
Strike Constrict

16/8/4 dd+1s/d6slsiddw LVO 147774 dd+2wid6+2wlddm Lo

STR 1S DEX 13 CON14

(d6+11) (d6+10) (d4+12)

INTS WIL 15
PER 5

{Animal 8 or 2d4+3) (d4+12)
(Animal 8 or 2d4+3)

Durability: 14/14/7/7

Action check: 17+/16/8/4

Defenses
+2 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +1 resistance moditier vs. ranged attacks

Move: sprint 50, run 30, walk 10, ump 12) #Actions:3 Reaction store: Good/2

Armor: d6+1 (L), d6 (HI), d4 (En)

Attacks

AEATURES

Pummel 16/8/4 d6+1s/dBw/d6+2w Lo

Skills Stealth [11]-hide [14); Stamina (8}-endurance [14); Aware-

Bite

1477/3

Thrownrock 14/7/3

ddsid6s1s/ddw dd-ls/ddsidd+2s

Lo Lo

[14]. ness [11]; Resolve [11}-physical resolve

The ophidian is a snakelike creature the size of a python that kills through constriction. However, the alien ophidian also possesses a tough exoskeleton with daggerlike bone ribs that impale prey caught in its deadly embrace.
The creature's preferred hunting technique is to lurk in the shallows of a stream or pond and feed on animals that come to drink. It attacks with a strike of its blunt, armored head, attempting to stun its prey or knock the victim into deeper water. In the following action, the ophidi-
an attempts to loop itselt around its prey and constrict. Its
embrace can only be broken by killing the creature. The ophidian is unlikely fo attack large groups, prefer-

Defenses
+3 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks
+2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d4 (L), d4-1 (HI), d4 (En)
Skills
Athletics [15}-climb [20], jump [18], throw [16]; Acrobatics [13}-fall [14); Movement [14); Stamina [14}-endurance [18];
Awareness (15}-intuition 18], perception (18]; Investigate
[18}-search [16]; Resolve [15).
The alien primate is taller, thinner, and much longer of Limb than a gorilla, although it still outweighs an adult

ring to wait for solitary targets.

human by 30 to 40 kg. The creature possesses gray, leath-

ery skin with a mane of stiff bristles and hairy patches on

Piscine

its lower arms and legs. Alien primates avoid humans in the open forest o jun-

STRS

(d4+7)

INT2

(Animal 6 or d4+4)

gle, unless the primates outnumber the human by more

DEX 14 (d4+12)

WIL 7

(d4+5)

than two to one. However, these creatures become ex-

CON S5 (d443)

PER2

Durability: 5/5/3/3

Move: swim 70
Reaction score: Ordinary/2

(Animal 6 or d4+4) Action check: 14+/13/6/3
#Actions: 2

tremely aggressive when defending their lair. Primates
are very social creatures that live in troops or packs of up
to forty members.

Attacks
Bite
Shock

10/5/2 dbs/ddw/dd+1w
12/6/3 dBs/dBwid12w

Lo
LYo

Defenses +1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +2 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks
Armor: none (LI), none (HI), none (En)

Skills
Movement [5]; Stamina [S}-endurance [10]; Awareness [7];
Resolve [7].

The alien piscine is a fishlike creature roughly 2 meters in length. In appearance and temperament, it most closeIy resembles the great barracuda of Earth. Two long, thin, whiplike feelers extend from its fins. Piscines hunt in small schools of five to ten animals, though they don't
40 employ any cooperative tactics. While its bite is dangerous, the piscine has a far more

Rodent

STR4

(d4+2)

INT 2

(Animal 7 or d4+5)

DEX 14 (d4+12)

WIL7

(d4+5)

CON3

(d4+0)

PER4

(Animal 13 or d4+11)

Durability: 3/3/2/2

Action check: 15+/14/7/2

Move: sprint 60, run 40, walk 12, (jump 10) #Actions: 2

Reaction score: Good/l

Attacks

Dart

1684 Isi2silw

Lo

plus poison (see text)

Defenses +1 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks

+3 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks

Armor: d4-1 (LI), none (HI), d4-1 (En)

Skills Athletics [41-jump [10], throw [8]; Acrobatics [14}-fall [16];
Stealth [14]-hide [19); Stamina [3]; Awareness [7}-intuition (101,

The alien rodent is a small omnivore about the size of a large jackrabbit. Its covered in green and brown fur that blends well with its surroundings, making it very difficult to spot when it's in normal ground cover. It has powerful hind legs, useful for leaping to make quick getaways, and short front limbs suited for digging up insects. Typically, each colony consists of dozens of individuals sharing a maze of twisting burrows.
`The rodent bolts from almost any conceivable threat, but it also has a dangerous defense mechanism: @ hump over its shoulders that contains a battery of four poisoned darts, propelled by an air bladder. The creature can fire these darts out to 4/8/12 meters (short, medium, and long range). Although these darts inflict minimal damage. they have a powertul, irritating venom (+2 penalty to the victim's Constitution feat check) with an onset time of 2 rounds and a duration of 6 hours.

Saurian

STR 20 (2d4+15)

INT3

(Animal 10 or 2d4+5)

DEX 8

(d4+6)

WIL 10 (d4+8)

CON18

(2d6+1l)

PER 2

(Animal 7 or d4+5)

Durability: 27/27/13/13

Action check: 13+/12/6/3

Move: sprint 50, run 30, walk 16, (jump 16) #Actions: 3

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Attacks

Bite

22/11/5 2d6w/d4+1m/d6+2m

LG

Claw/kick

22/11/5 d4+3w/d6+4w/ddm

LG

Tail lash

18/9/5 dBs/d12s/d6w

LG

Defenses
Good toughness +3 resistance moditier vs. melee attacks no resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks (En) Armor: d6+2 (LI}, dd+1 (HI), d6+1

Skills Stealth [9]; Movement [18); Stamina (18l-endurance [22];
Awareness [10}-intuition [14], perception [12]; Investigate
[10}-search [12]; Resolve [10}-physical resolve [16].
The alien saurian is a large and deadly predator, having the size and build of a dinosaur such as the allosaurus or gorgosaurus, A squrian isn't quite as big as tyrannosaur, but it's faster and smarter, and equipped with teeth and claws that would put a T-rex to shame.
Despite its size and bulk, the saurian is moderately stealthy. It prefers to find a patch of good cover--a grove, thicket, or boulder-fall--and wait for prey to wander with-
in range of @ quick, deadly rush. It can strike with a terri-
fying bite, a kick from its sickle-clawed leg, and a whiplike tail lash against anyone behind it. Saurians are extraordinarily fearless and bloodthirsty.

Trilobite

STR8

(d4+86)

INT 1

DEX 12 (d4+10)

WILS

CON6

(dd+4)

PER 2

Durability: 6/6/3/3

Move: run 80, walk 10, swim 10

Reaction score: Marginal/l

(Animal 4 or d4+2) (d4+7)
(Animal 6 or d4+4) Action check: 9+/8/4/2
#Actions: 2

Attacks
Bite
Acid jet

10/5/2 dds/ddwidd+2w
1052 ddwldd+2w/2dd+ 1w

Defenses +1 resistance moditier vs. melee attacks
+2resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks (En) Armor: d4+3 (L1), d4+1 (HD), d4+2

Lo
b LUG

Skills

Stealth [12}-hide [14); Stamina [6}-endurance {10); Aware-

ness [9-intuition [12]; Resolve [9].

SIHN1HIHD

3
Trilobites were a group of arthropodlike animals that vanished from primeval Earth before the rise of the dinosaurs. They were armored with an articulated shell,

somewhat similar to modern horseshoe crabs. The alien

H3I6

trilobite shares the general appearance of these ancient ˘ i

animals, but is considerably larger and more advanced.

It's more than a meter long and nearly as wide, with dozens of small, clawed legs useful for scuttling about in shallow waters or along nearby coasts.

The creature has a small reservoir of extremely potent

organic acid that it squirts through a snoutlike projection
on top of its shell. This stuff has a range of 6meters and

Good firepower, cutting through most armors with ease.

The trilobite can use this attack form once every 12 hours.

Ursine

STR 17 {2d4+12)

INT 5

(Animal 14 or d4+12)

DEX 11 (d4+9)

WIL 14 (d4+12)

CON16 (2d4+11)

PER4

(Animal 13 or dd+11)

Durability: 24/24/12/12

Action check: 15+/14/7/3

Move: sprint 60, run 40, walk 10

#Actions: 4

Reaction score: Good/2

Attacks Bite Claws

20105 ddw/dda+2widd+dw LG 20/10/5 dBs/ddw/d6+1w LG

Defenses Resistant to toxins (see text)
+4 resistance modifier vs. melee attacks +1 resistance modifier vs. ranged attacks Armor: d6+1 (L), d4+1 (HI), d6 (En)
Skills Athletics [17; Movement [16]; Stamina (16}-endurance [20];
Awareness [14}-intuition [16]; Investigate (14}-search [16], track [16]; Resolve (14}-physical resolve [20].
The alien ursine is a bearlike creature covered in thick, loose folds of tough hide. It has claws and testh of extraordinary sharpness. Its baggy hide gives it a clumsy, slow-moving appearance, but there's nothing awkward about the ursine's ability to deal out damage in a fight. In addition to its great physical power, the rsine is quite intelligent. It employs a variety of ruses, distractions, and
cooperative tactics in order to close with its prey. Ursines
almost always hunt in twos or threes, taking turns driving prey toward each other and sharing their kills.
The ursine is virtually immune to most known poisons
u and drugs, gaining a -4 bonus on any Constitution feat
checks called for by exposure to various toxins.

human heros Tt an AD&D cha
should be o dieval fc
1 Handling

nts the Score for

Dwarves

Charm Resistance: El s gain an

Dwarves receive the following broad increase of +4 to their istanc

skills at no cost: Athletics, Stamina, Knowledge, Awareness, Resolve, and Interact n.
Magic and Poison Re: stance Dwarves gain an to increase of 42

modifiers against all Arc -ane Magic, Faith, and Super Power charm or sleep FX specialty skills (see Ch ter 16: Optional Ru s for more tails), as well as charm- and

their resistance modifiers against

sleep-like mindwalking pov

Arcane Magic and Faith FX specialty skills (see Chapter 16: Optional

Infravision: Elves ignore any penalties that apply in situations of

Rules). Dwarves also gain a -2 bonus w illumination or total dark

to Constitution feat checks caused

provided there are objects producing

y poison and radiation

variant radiant heat in the areo

Defensive Skill: Dwarves add +2 to
thelr resistance modifiers against

Secret Door Detection: Elves gain -2 bonus {o their [nvestigate--

melee attacks or unarmed attacks search checks. If the elf doesn't have

from humanoid3smeters or taller in the Investigate skill, he gains this

height

ep bonus to his untrained skill

Infravision: Dwarves ignore any

rolls,

penalties that apply in situations of

low illumination or total darkness--

Gnomes

provided there are objects producing Gnomes receive the Athletics, Stami

variant radiant heat in the area.

na, Manipulation, Knowledge,

Mining Skills: Dwarves possess a Awareness, and Interaction broad

special Will-based broad skill that

skills at no cost

allows them to check for the follow-

Magic Resistance: Gnomes gain

ing phenomena

ance an increase of +2 to their re: modiiers against Arcane Magic and

Detect grade or slope 2 step bonus
Detect new
construction 2 step bonus Detect sliding/shifting
s or rooms 1 step bonus Detect stonework traps.
pits, and deadlalls no modifier Detect approximate
depth underground no modifier

Faith FX specialty skills Defensive Skills: Gnomes add +2
to their resistance modifiers again
melee attacks or unarmed atta from humanoids 2.5 meters or taller
Infravision: Gnomes ignore any penalties that apply in situat low illumination or total darknessprovided there are objects producing

variant radiant heat in the area.

Elves

Mining Skills: Gnomes gain

Elves receive the following broad

Will-based broad skill that allows

atn

Athletics, Melee

em 1o check for the following phe-

ons or Primitive Ranged Weap- nomena:

ons (playe`s choice), Stealth, Knowl-

edge, Awareness, and I teraction

3

Detect grade or slope 2 step bonus

Detect new

construction

2 step bonus

A Detect sliding/shifting

walls or rooms

1 step bonus

'

Detect stonework traps,

pits, and deadfalls no modifier

*Detect approximate depth

underground

no modifier

Halflings have the following broad skills at no cost: Stamina, Stealth, Knowledge, Awareness, Resolve, and Interaction.
Magic and Poison Resistance: Halflings gain an increase of +2 to their resistance modifiers against Arcane Magic and Faith FX specialty skills. Halflings also gain a 2 bonus to Constitution feats caused by poi son and radiation.
Throwing Bonus: Halflings gain a
1 bonus when using Athletics throw. If a halfling doesn't possess this skill, he receives the bonus to an untrained check.
Infravision: Stout halflings ignore any penalties that apply in situa tions of low illumination or total darkness--provided there are ob jects producing variant radiant heat in the area. Mixedhalfling infravi
sion negates up to +2 penalties for near or total darkness.

Halfelves receive the following broad skills at no cost: Athletics, Stealth, Stamina, Knowledge, Aware ness, and Interaction.
Charm Resistance: Halfelves gain +2 to their resistance modifiers against Arcane Magic, Faith, and Super Power charm or sleep FX spe
cialty skills (see Chapter 16: Option al Rules for more details) as well as charm and sleeplike mindwalking powers.
Infravision: Halfelves ignore any penalties that apply in situations of
low illumination or total darkness-- provided there are objects producing variant radiant heat in the area.
Secret Door Detection: Halfelves
gain a 1 bonus to their Investigate-- search checks. If the halfelf doesn't have the Investigate skill, he still gains this bonus to his untrained skill rolls.

244

CONVERTING CLASS TO PROFESSION
The next step in the conversion process is selecting a profession that corresponds to the character's class. The suggested guidelines and spe cial notes are listed below:

Fighter --> Combat Spec

Paladin --> Combat Spec

Ranger --> Combat Spec

Cleric -->

Diplomat

Druid -->

Diplomat

Thiet -->

Free Agent

Bard --

Diplomat

Mage -->

Tech Op

Specialist Wizard --> Tech Op

Fighter If the character is a weapon special ist, he should select a specialty skill which represents the weapon type in
which he specializes for his Combat Spec attack skill bonus. For example, if a fighter specializes in the long sword, he should assign his special bonus to the Melee Weaponsblade skill.

Paladin Paladins retain several of their spe cial benefits, as shown below. Pal adins must select the Faith perk during conversion.
Detect Evil: With a successful Awareness check, a paladin can de tect evil intent at up to 20 meters.
Saving Throw Bonus: Paladins get a 1 bonus when resisting any kind of damage this applies to Constitu tion feat checks against hazards.
Disease Immunity: Paladins re ceive a 3 bonus when resisting
disease.
Healing: Once per day, paladins may heal 1 wound box per level by laying on hands. They can also cure disease once per week for every 5
levels they possess. Magic: Paladins can use magic at
Sth level and higher (see the "Magic"" section below).

Rangers must select the Investigate-- track and Stealth skills during char acter conversion. Class benefits translate in the following fashion:
Twoweapon fighting: If the ranger wears armor with an action penalty of +1 step or less, he can fight with a

weapon in each hand at no penalty. Heavier armor negates this benefit.
Tracking: Rangers gain a 2 bonus to all Investigatetrack skill checks, and automatically gain 1 rank in In vestigatetrack for every 3 character levels (3rd, 6th, 9th, etc.) they pos sess.
Species Enemy: Against one type of enemy, the ranger gains a 2 bonus to attack skill checks, but the ranger suffers a +2 penalty to any encounter skills he attempts to use.
Animal Handling: When a ranger uses this skill, he gains a 1 bonus for every 3 character levels (1 at 3rd, 2 at 6th, etc.) he possesses.
Magic: Rangers can use magic, beginning at 8th level. See "Magic" section for more details.
SMpaegceiasliasntdWizards
A wizard's major power is the ability to employ spells (see the "Magic" section for more information). Thus, wizards receive the Arcane Magic FX broad skill for free. In addition, wiz ards can wear any armor that does not inflict an action check penalty (for example, the CF coat) and still cast spells.
While most wizards possess mini mal weapon skills when first con verted, they may acquire any new skills and wield any weapons once they leave their homeworlds.
Specialist Wizard Saving Throw Modifier: When a specialist wizard uses an Arcane Magic FX specialty skill from his preferred school, the target suffers a +1 penalty to resist that specialty skill (see the "Magic" section for more details).
Clerics Magic is the chief weapon of the
cleric see the "Magic" section below. Clerics cannot use weapons that spill blood, so Melee Weaponsblud geon weapons remain their first choice. Stutter weapons and any other weapons that only inflict stun damage are also acceptable. Clerics must select the Faith perk during character conversion, and they re ceive the Faith FX broad skill free.
Druids Druids must select the Life Sci broad skill and the botany and zoolo gy specialty skills during the conver sion process. They use magic, described below, and retain the sev eral special benefits.

Identify plants, animals, and pure Level Advances

Combat Skills

water: When a druid uses botany or From the moment when an AD&D

z00logy to identily lifeforms, he gains a-1 bonus for every 3 levels.
Pass through overgrown areas: At 3rd level, the druid automatically ac-

character becomes an ALTERNITY hero, he no longer advances as an AD&D
character. No level-based benefits-- such as new spells, special fol-

quires the Movement-trailblazing lowers, or new class abilities--

skill at no cost.

accrue. Whatever powers and abili-

ties the hero possesses at the time of

Thieves

conversion are all that he's ever

Thieves must select the Stealth and

going to get; benefits provided by the

Manipulation broad skills during

BurERNITY rules are pertectly fine.

conversion, and they must buy at

least 1 rank in Athletics--climb. There

p Choose the broad skills that the
character must acquire in order to
wield weapons in which he has proficiency. Almost all characters will be proficient in some kind of melee weapon, so they'll need the Melee Waapons broad skill. Many characters should also select the Primitive Ranged Weapons broad skill. lta
unarmed RI0H3ddt
character specializes in an
fighting style, he should select Unarmed Attack or Acrobatics-defen-

are no other special conversion notes for thieves.

SKILLS sive martial arts.

Refer to TapLE PS: HERO STARTING

SKILL

Heroes with unmodified THACOs better than 20 should purchase 1 spe-

Bard
All bards must select the Entertainment and Manipulation broad skills, as well as at least | rank in Athletics-climb. Bards gain the ability to cast wizard spells, beginning at 3rd level (see the "Magic" section for more details).
Influence reactions: Bards gain a ~1 bonus for every three levels (-1 at rd, -2 at 6th, etc) to any encounter skills they attempt to use aiter a successful use of their Entertainment skill.
Inspire allies: If a bard chooses to inspire his allies in combat, all affected characters gain a1 bonus to

POINTS in the Player's Handbook, and check the hero's new Intelligence

cialty skill rank per 2 points of im-
provement in the weapon or

score. This gives you the fotal number of broad and specialty skills the hero may have, along with the number of skill points available. After purchasing any skills mandated by the hero's class or weapon skills, you should have some "leftover" skill

weapons they typically use. For example, a 7th-level fighter has a THACO of 14, which is 6 points better than a 20. If he uses a long sword, he should purchase Melee Weaponsblade 3.
Remember, higher-level charac-

points to spend. Use these to round
out the character's skills, converting s many of his nonweapon proficiencies as you can.
There are three general guide-

ters must pay for the skill levels they acquire. For example, starting with blade 3 costs 9 skill points (2+3+4=9) for a Combat Spec hero.

MAGIC AND lines you should follow in converting
nonweapon proficiencies (NWP) to

skills:

SPECIAL

their attack rolls and a +1 increase to their resistance modifiers. The bard must play for 3 rounds to inspire his iriends, and the effects last | round perlevel.
LEVEL

» I the NWP name matches the POWERS

name of an existing skill (Swimming
o Movement-swim, for instance)
convert the ADBD proficiency directIy. You may have to buy a new broad
skill in order to find a match in the
specialty skills.

Magic is generally not the mainstay of a science fiction setting. Thus, the default conversion rule is s follows: Magic simply doesn't work in the AurerniTy game. If a wizard, clexic, or

» 1 the NWP doesn't have a corre- other magic-using character adven-

A character's level in the AD&D
game system is translated directly to his level in the ALTERNITY game. For
example, a 3rd-level paladin becomes a level 3 Combat Spec. The character is entitled to all the addi-
tional skill points or achievement
benefits appropriate for his level. For example, a level 2 character has 6

sponding skill, use your best judg`ment and try to select skills that
parallel what the character previ-

tures in an SF setting, they can't ac-
cess their magical spells and abilities.

ously had. For example, Charioteering could easily become a specialty
under the Athletics broad skill.
» 1f there seems to be no corresponding skill, try to find a skill that
relies on the same Ability Score as

However, many people will want

to include magic in their You can include magic in

campaigns. your uni-

verse by utilizing the FX rules found

in Chapter 16: Optional Rules. This

allows you the flexibility of magic,

extra skill points to distribute, a
level 3 character has 13, a level 4
character 21, and so on. Hit points, THACO, and saving
throw scores vanish.

the nonweapon proficiency. For example, Weather Sense could convert
to a specialty skill under Physical
a Science. If none of these work, draft new broad skill description.

`while maintaining an SF feel.
Before magic-using heroes can cast spells, they must purchase either the Arcane Magic or Faith FX broad skills. Converted wizards and

In general, high-level AD&D characters fall into the "Advanced HeToes" rules (found in Chapter 2 Hero
Creation) for starting characters at

priests receive their respective FX

Depending on the character's Intelligence and level, it may be necessary for him to lose a few skills in order to

broad skills for free. Then, they must convert their existing AD&D spells into FX specialty skills.

higher than level 1. Theyll have

make the conversion. Choose non-

`more broad and specialty skill slots weapon proficiencies that are least

available, and more skill points to
distribute.

important to the character concept
and get rid of them for now.

U5

CONVERTING

bA4

SDPELLCASTERS In A MAGICAL

UNIVERSE

«a spell that improves the caster's
Armor Class by 2 should instead increase his resistance modifier against physical attacks by +1.
Other Spells

Conversion rules for AD&D characters are as follows: A character re-
tains any spellcasting or magical

Other spells have their normal effects as much as possible--for example, a knock FX specialty skill

AD&D APPENDIX abilities he had under the

could open an electronic lock as eas-

rules, replacing them with FX abili- ily as a stout bolt, while the silence

ties. Al the time of conversion, each character receives a number of skill points with which to convert AD&D spells into FX specialty skills according to the following progression: wiz-

15" radius FX specialty skill does just what it should. For purposes of Hit Dice affected, an ALTERNITY character or creature has a number of Hit Dice equal toits level (for characters) or

ards, clerics, druids and specialty one-hallf its Constitution (for

priests receive 7 points per level,
rangers receive 5 points per level
above 8th, and paladins receive 5

creatures).
# Example: Marlo is in the process of converting an AD&D mage

points per level above 9th. For ex-

over to an ALTERNITY hero. Currently,

ample, a level 4 druid has 28 points she is evaluating the magic missile

to spend on FX specialty skills. Con- spell. Using the FX rules, she creates

verted characters cannot use these

ths following FX specialty skill de-

spell points to purchase other nonFX skills--though they can use their regular allotment of skill points to buy FX specialty skills.
Magic-using heroes must spend their skill points on converting spells

scription:
Magic Missile Arcane Magic, Conjure spell: WIL; Ordinary quality, cost 9
This specialty skill allows the

1o FX abilities. A player must exam- caster to manipulate energy into

ine each spell and pay all costs nec- small bolts or "missiles" that inflict

essary to convert it to an FX ability. Ordinary Energy (En) damage. The

Thus, high-level spells and spells

caster makes a skill check against

that inflict great amounts of damage this specialty skill to determine the

cost more than low-level ones.

amount of damage: Critical Failure,

Because of the nature of the FX rules, many AD&D spells will not retain their maximum effectiveness, or
they will cost too much to pur-

`missile attacks a random target; Marginal, d4-2w (minimum 1); Ordinary, d4-lw; Good, déw; Amazing, da+lw,

chase--orcing the hero (especially high-level wizards) to lose a good number of spells. You can choose to grant spells to the heroes at a fraction of their cost (or at no cost at all), depending on the amount of magic

This skill functions at the ranges of 10,20, and 30 meters. The caster receives a -1 bonus to his skill check at short range (10), no modifier at medium range (20), and a +1 penalty to his skill check at long range (30).

in your campaign. However, you

A hero receives one extra missile

should enforce the total point cost

at skill ranks 3, 6, 9, and 12. Thus, a

when heroes wish to purchase a new hero with magic missile 6 can fire

FX specialty skill. In this way, you

three missiles in a single combat

can regulate the influx of magic in your science fiction setting.

round (one each phase, with the remainder firing on the last phase of the round).

Converting Nondamaging

After designing the specialty skill, Marlo checks Table G71 in Chapter
16 to figure out the total cost of the

Spells For most nondamaging spells, you must apply your judgment to determine the costs involved. In general, a2-point penalty in the AD&D sys-
246tem is roughly equal to a 1-step pendlty in the ALTERNITY rules. Thus,

skill. She determines that the magic

missile specialty skill costs 9 points

to buy. Of course, she could add trap-

pings o cost.

the

skill

to

lower

this

point

EQuUIPMENT
The equipment list for PL 1 to PL 3 in the Player's Handbook is short; the game is intended to reflect modern to far-future roleplaying. There are few weapons and armors that can translate directly--for example, the spear, short sword, broad sword, leather armor, chain mail, or plate mail.
Where possible, use the statistics as given. For example, if an AD&D character happens to wear plate mail, use the stats for plate mail. If the match isn't perfect, loosely translate the hero's equipment to match, A long sword and broad sword are similar enough to use the same stats in while studded leather armor is pretty close to normal leather armor.
You can also tweak the weapon and armor lists to get the exact stats you want. For example, a two-handed sword is somewhat larger and more powertul than a broad sword; if you simply add +1 o +2 to the broad sword's damage ratings, you'd have something approximating an AD&D two-handed sword. Similarly, banded mail is a little better than chain mail, so a suit of banded mail might offer a modest increase in protection over the normal chain mail stats.
Magical Items
Use the Super Power-enchanted relic FX rules for building magical items.
FANTASY HEROES IN A Mobpern GAME
`Traditional class roles of AD&D characters are likely to change as they
adapt to the ALTERNITY system. For ex-
ample, the hit points and fighting abilities of the fighter and the mage won't be that much different, but clerics are no longer the first aid kits of the party--especially if they lose their magical powers. A good roleplayer will pick up on this shift and portray his character accordingly. How does a priest of Odin reconcile his beliefs with the fact that he no longer receives spells? Can a wizard turn his inquisitive mind to the study of science? Encourage your players to think about how their characters perceive this change in the universe around them.

This index references both the Game- Animal Friend perk 84, 104, 127

`master Guide and the ATERNITY Player's

Handbook. biue refer

Page to the

GnaummebmerasstperrinGteduiidne.

Animal
Animal Animal

Handling broad riding specialty

s7k8i,l8l 178,

81

statistics 231-232

CCCaaaurrlegdeorro,cnogmeSnpteaartraitolmn2e9n1, t3310-410,7209 Celebrity perk 84, 104, 127

p

3D 153, 156, 240, 243, 244

Animal training specialty 79, 92, 104 Antivirus program 161, 164

Challenge Challenge

paths scene

120-121 120-122, 45

Ability Scores 13-20, 32-33

gasesniegrnaitniogn222, 23-224

increasing 105, 126, 216

limits 33
optional rules

33

random 22-24
reducing 225, 242
scale 20 Achievement benefits 126-127 Achievement bonuses 84

Achievement level summary 126, 127
Achievement points |11, 125

AArpcpalniceatMionagicproFgXra2m2315-82, 21561

Armor, general 52, 41, 54

aliens in 189

dddddeeeaessmssccccarrrriiiigppppettttiiiiooootonnnnssss1((((9PPPPLLLL17306)--)PP11LL882538)) 11--118881573-187

descriptions (PL 8) 191

layering 190

of objects 56

of of

starships vehicles

148-149 132

time frame 121

HI081

Character templates 14-17

supporting cast 95-39

Character traits 101-102, 37, 122-123

Character vs. character 36, 63,79, 83, 99

Charge (combat tactic) 50

Charge cells 140

Charm specialty 81, 100

Chemisiry specialty 87

Civilization, creating 203-207

Ccecuiovlntiuolirmzeay2ti0o2n50L6evel 204

57 Achievement track 41, 125
Acid (hazard)

`Acrobatics Acrobatics,

broad skill 71,70
specific skill specialty

72

Act specialty 99

Action check bonus 126,

3172, 373,

38, 50

disallowed 38

increase 126, order of play

127 37, 50

`supporting Action round

c37a,st1327, 48

Actions, assisting 36, 50

`performing postponing

35,49 51

two at once 36, 51
Actions per round 37, 38, 126,

127

Active memory (computer) 151

AADdm&Dinigstaramtieonconbverorsaiodnski2ll42782, 9405

Advanced heroes 31

Adventure 45

Cauldron Station 13-17

hooks 215-217

planned 211-215

spontaneous 209-211

Age 20-22

AL221,222, 167-168

Aiming 49, 57

Air vehicle specialty 76

`Alarm program 161, 164
Alien artifact, general 84, 86,

103,

107

acquiring 165

designing165-168

drawbacks 174-175

powers 168-174

Alien compendium 236-241

Alien statistics 231-237, 236

Aliens' Aliens

iAnbairlmityorSc1o8re9s 77-25, 28

Aliens' skill Allegiances,

pgoeinnetsra2l 8105-106

AAArrrmotiafo-iercfiafOelcptIenrtaaettltilaoicgnkebsnrc4oea6d22s1,k2il2l2,701, 6647-168

LParowgLreesvselL2ev0e4l-220503
Clairaudience specialty

230

Assist program 161, 164
Astrogation, drivespace specialty

86

Astrogation, system specialty 87

`Astronomy specialty 87

Athletics broad skill 70, 65

Athletics, specific skill spacialty 70, 68

Atmospheric Atmospheric

52 composition 64, pressure 64-55, 52

Attack Attack

fporromcsed4u3r, e4403

helpless opponents 55
Aocking withtwo weapens

1,

5765

Atibutes 10,6, 15120

Autofire 46, 74

suppressive fire 50

Automatic weapon attack modes 74

Auxiliary Awareness

cobmropadartsmkiellnt781,4802, ,210049, 105,

Clairvoyance specialty 230

Climb specialty 70, 65
Clothing and aceessories

133-136

CClluumelseyssflfalwaw,
Code of Honor

851, 10077 flaw 86, 107

Cold 65, 52
Colonization

SF 178

Combat 41-51

actions 55-58

called shot 50

helpless opponents 55

grid and multiple

maps 42
attackers

44

Combat Combat

amrmovoermesnpteci4a1l,ty5566

terrain 49

Combat Combat

mscoevneeme4n1t-51r,a4te6s

39

1

Combat SF 179, 44

Awareness check 33

Bad Bad

luck 49
Luck flaw

86,

107

Bargain specialty Base situation die

81, 67,

100
12, 47,

50

BBBaiioottklloeingyemsissipnedbcsriopaaletdcyias8lktiy4ll223209

BBliaodweeasppoenciaslpteyc6ia3lty 229

Blocking 14, 70

Bombs Botemy

137
specialty

84

BBBolluuwidfgsseppoenecciiasalpltteyyc7i6a04l,ty9683

Brawl specialty 70
Break-in program 161,

162

CCCooommmbbmaaattnSSdppeecccom2c9ap,rae1r0et,rms3e01nt11140-,121045

Command Command

ssptaetciioanlty16110,1205

Communications Communications

sepqeucipiamlteyn8t 8135,

137

CCoommpmutuerniccaotimonpsonsetanttison15230-8154

Computer Computer

gauntlet 166
operation specialty 75,

82,

151

Computer Science broad skill 75,79,

151

CCCooosmpnnascptceuientteustrrhtsaiiotpin(og1n1e5np90ee1,rr53ak1l2,)&411, 65180,241,-61192573

losing 105-106

using 104-105 Allies 91

All-out movement 1, 55

Alternate history SF 178

Amazing damage 53, 181

Ambidextrous perk
AAmndmrooidesxp2e2n2dit_ure

8447, 104,

127

Animal compendiuin 232-235

BBBBrruroierbasaektdi(nsaspgtkieialccolsikbajl6etm7cy,tos68d08e6,,)96948176, 074 BBuusreinaeuscsracbyroasdpesckiialllty740, 78 Called shot 50 Campaign 9, 44
calendar [19 design 177-187

I Constitution feat 57, 73, 75
Constitution increase

oo

a7 14, 75-78,228-230

Contact specialty 235

Contacts, general 104-105

acquiring 105, 127

expert 104
information

104

rloessoinugrc1e0150-4106
using 104-105

u

Control die 33, 11

p

Control metabolism specialty 229 Control program 161, 164 Copilot's station 159, 208

Coprocessor (computer) 151

Corporate specialty 74, 79

Corrupt program 161, 162

Court procedures specialty 83 Cover modifier 49, S0

INDEX

Crash program 161, 163

Crashing (a vehicle) 201

Creativity broad skill 78, 92

Creativity, specific skill specialty 7879, 93

Crew compartment 140, 209

Criminal elements specialty 79, 95 Critical Failure 35, 49

on action check 38, 11, 50

on attack roll 45

Crossbow specialty 74

Cruising speed 201

hips 144

Culture broad skill 80, 96

Currency 130, 134

Cyber gear 221, 239245

cost of 239, 240

starting 239

Cyber tolerance 240

Cybernetic surgery 85, 239240 Cyberpunk SF 180

Cykosis 244

Damage 5156, 5153 amazing 52, 53, 181 to armor 191 to cyber gear 242 degrading 52, 190 fatigue 54, 53, 78

to objects 5556, 202 to passengers 202 secondary damage 5152, 52, 53, 54 and shadows 166 to spaceships 161163, 210211 Strength adjustment 40 stun 58, 51 upgrading 52 to vehicles 137, 203
wound 53, 52 Damage control (spaceship) 149, 163,
209 Dance specialty 99 Danger Sense perk 84, 104, 127 Daredevil specialty 71, 70 Data slate 152, 153 Datadoc program 160, 161 Datalink specialty 235 Datascan program 160, 161 Dazed, fatigue damage 54, 53
mortal damage 54, 53 penalties 53, 54, 53 stun damage 53, 51 wound damage 5354, 52 Death 5455 Deception broad skill 80, 98 Decode program 160, 161 Deduce specialty 75, 82 Defense compartment 209 Defenses specialty 88
248Defensive martial arts specialty 72, 70 Degrading damage 52, 190 Delicate flaw 86, 108

Demolitions broad skill 75, 80

Desktop (computer) 152, 153

Detection 39

spaceship 157

vehicle 133

Dexterity 19, 32

Dexterity feat 71, 70

Dexterity increase 127

Dexterity resistance modifier 64, 66, 105

Dexterity skills 7173, 7076

Dice rolling 33, 47, Diplomat 29, 10, 31

Diplomat careers 114115

Direct fire specialty 68

Dirt Poor flaw 86, 108, 130

Disarm specialty 80

Disease 57, 84

'

Disguise 99

Dodge moditier 44, 45, 50

Dodge specialty 72, 71

Dodging 45

Doublestrike 68

Downloading 166

Dn'vetpacesaatrogafion specialty 86

Dumb GIDs 158 Durability 3340, 106, 126
ip 139 vehicle 127
Dying and death 5455, 53, 77, 82, 84
Dynamite 180
Electricity (hazard) 58 Electrochemical weapons 178 Electrokinetics specialty 233 Electronics compartment 140, 209 Empathy specialty 231 Employees Encode program 161 Encounter paths 124 Encounter scene 124, 46
time frame 125 Encounter skills 124, 46, 79, 96, 97, 231 Encumbrance 56 Endurance challenge 61, 122 Endurance specialty 77, 105, 108 Engineering compartment 140, 208 Engineering specialty 88 Engineering station 209 Enhance program 161, 245 Entertainment broad skill 80, 99 Entertainment program 161 Environments, general 6165 Equipment 11, 41, 111, 129130 Equipment, acquiring 30, 139 ESP broad skill 230 Esuits 6365, 136, 143 Exhaustion, avoiding 94 Exhaustion challenge 61
recovery 62 Experts 9495 Exploration SF 180, 44 Explosives 180 Exposure challenge 61
recovery 62 Extrasensory Perception broad skill 230 Eyeballing 34
Faith FX 225 Faith perk 84, 104 Falling 58, 58 Fall specialty 58, 72, 71 Fasterthanlight travel 146, 185186 Fatigue damage 54, 53 Feat checks 36, 67, 63 Figuring the odds 34

Filthy Rich perk 85, 104, 130 Fire (hazard) 58~ Firepower 52, 174, 190 » First aid kit 135, 137138 ~ First aid specialty 82 First encounter specialty 87 Fists of Iron perk 85, 105, 127 ' Flaws 30, 8687, 112, 36, 107109, 126, 127 Flight specialty 72, 71 Flintlock specialty 74 Forensics specialty 76, 84 Forgetful flaw 87, 108 Fortitude perk 85, 105, 127 Fortress program 161, 164
FFFrrreaaaeglilA2eg1ef2lna3tw298,71, 01, 0381
Free Agent careers 115116 Friendly fire 46 Future earth SF 180
Super Power 225226 Gamble specialty 80, 98 Game session 11 Gauntlet, computer 152, 153
gridcaster 152, 153, 154 medical 152, 153, 154 professional 152, 153, 154 Genetics specialty 76, 84 Genres 178183 GIDs 158 Goggles, protective 134, 135 Good Luck perk 85, 105 GRAPH system 6265, 52, 142 Gravity 62, 63, 52, 107, 216 Gravity induction technology 145, 133 Great Looks perk 85, 105 Grenades 4647, 57, 182186 Grid (PL 5) 156157 (PL 6) 157158 (PL7)158 Grid log program 161, 164 Gridcaster 152, 153, 154 Gridlock program 161, 164 Gridsuit 152, 153, 154 Gridsuit shadows 158 Gridwipe program 161 Guardian program 181, 165 Hacking specialty 75, 80, 151 Hacking programs 162163 Hardware specialty 75, 80, 151 Hazards, general 5761, 122 acid 57
suffocation 61 Heal specialty 229 Healing naturally 54 Healing stun damage 82, 84 Healing wound damage 82, 84 Heat 65, 52 Heavy stun damage 54, 52

He((aPPvLLy56))w11e88ap42o--n11s88(P54L 4) 181-182

(PL7) (PLB)

185185 186

Heavy Heavy

Weapons broad wound damage

53 skill 70,
54,

67

HHeerioghbtaecnkegdroAubnildity1p0e2rk-1850, 4105

Hero concept 19

Heardovcarnecaetidonheprrooecses3s120

Manipulation broad skill Maps, local and strategic

712,8792

63 in three dimensions 190
Marginal success 14,

Martial arts 70

Mechalus 23-25

Medical gauntlet 152, 153, 154

Medical gear 135, 137-140

Medical Medical

Skcnioewncleedbgreoaspdesckiailllty768, 844

Medical skills 149
Melee attacks, general

44-46

Hero sheets 19, 253-256 Hide specialty 72,75 Holding your breath 58, §7

Melee weapons (PL

(PLS) (PL6)

172 172-173

0-PL

4)

171,

172

30 Horror SF 79, 181-182,
Human heroes

44

(PL7)173
(PL8) 173-174

Income 108-109

Hlicit business specialty
Ilusion specialty 235

74,

79

Impact Indirect

dfiarme asgpeec5i8c,lt5y868

Infamy flaw 87, 108

Infantry tactics specialty 89

Information retrieval 79, 157, 167

IInnstpeilrleigesnpceeci2a0l,ty33101

Intelligence fect 74, 79

Intelligence increase 127 Intelligence skills 74-78, 78-80, 230-233

Intentions (spaceship combat) 158 Intentions (vehicle combat) 13, 134, 200

Interaction broad skill 81, 100

IInntteerrflaucdeesde40v,ic8e0,(1c2o0m, p2u1te4r) 152

IInntteerrvrioewgatespsepceicailatylty817,31, 9030

Intuition specialty 39, 78, 92

Intimidate specialty 81, 100

Invention specialty 77, 89
Investigate broad skill 79, 93

Jump specialty 70,67 Juryrig specialty 77,89

Melee Weapons broad skill 70, 69

Melee Weapons rank benefits 68

Memory. computer 151
Memory harness 153, 156,

168

Menace program 161, 165

Mental resolve Microcomputer

s1p52e,ci1a5l3t,y1759,594

Mind Mind

brelaasdtinsgpescpieacltiyal2ty32631

Mind shield specialty 236
Mindwalker 221, 229

Mindwalker careers 236-237

Mine (explosive) 180

Mirror image program 161, 165

Miscellaneous gear 136, 145-147

Modern
73

Ranged

Weapons

broad skill

Monetary Money on

hawanadrd112129, 126,

127

Moral attitude 101, 37, 121-122

Morph Mortal

sdpaemcaiaglety524,2593

Motivation Movement

b1r0o1a, d37s,k1ill1873-, 17260

Moavlle-omuet n4t 14,05-542

combat 41, 55

9 Key concepts 9, Kinetic shield specialty 233

iinntteerrpstlealnlaertar1y55,115885-185

Knockout rank benefit 63

Knockout, fatigue `mortal damage

d5a3mage

53

56 `mounted 41
overland 40,
penalties 41

94 recovering from 82, 84,
stun damage 52

strategic 40
Multiple attackers 44

wound damage 52 81 Knowledge broad skill 75, 83 Knowledge, specific skill specialty 75,

Land mine 180

Land vehicle specialty 76

Language specialty skill 75, 83

Last resort points 112,
avlillileasinasn9d 0sidekicks

398,159,

126

Mulistrike 68

Musical instrument specialty 99

Mutont origin 214

Mutants Mutation

2d19r,aw2b1a3ck-s212422-225

Mutation points 214-215

Mutations, advantageous 215-222

244 Nanocomputer 152, 153, 155, 240, Natural healing 54

Law broad skill 76, 83 8 Law enforcement procedures specialty

Navcognition specialty 262 Navigation broad skill 77, 86 Navigation, surface specialty 77,87

Laxans (new species) 26

Networks, computer 157

Leadership broad skill 81, 101

245 NiJack 153, 155, 244,

Levitation specialty 234 LLiiffetinSgcieonbcjeectbs ro7a0d skill 76, 84 Lockpick specialty 72,72

155 Nonprofessionals

89

Notebook (computer) 152, 153,

Objects, `armor

d5a6maging

55-56,

69

Mainframe 152, 153, 154

Management specialty 91

Maneuvers, `modiiers

tvoehskicilllec1h3e5,ck1s361, 13958

spaceships 158-159, 210

fire 59

lifting 70

toughness 56

Oblivious flaw Observant perk

8875,,110058, 127

Obsessed Obstacles

f1la2w287,

108

Old Injury flaw 87, 108

Open skills 64
Operating system

152

p

Operator Optional

rpurolegsra2m18s-21295, -31362

OOvveerrploawnderimngovem43e,n6t 956

Parachute, using a 58

RI0NI

Parrying 45, 69

Penalty reductions 216

Perception specialty 39, 78, 92

Peripherals (computer) 153, 155156

126 Perks 30, 83-86, 112, 36, 103-107,

Personality 20, 33

Personality feat 80, 96

Persondlity increase 127

Personality skills 80-81, 96-101, 234-236

Pharmaceuticals 138-139

Phases 38

Phobia flaw 87, 108

127 Photo Memory perk 85, 105,

Photokinetics specialty 234

Physical resolve specialty 79, 9%

Physical Science broad skill 77, 87

Physics specialty 87

Pickpocket specialty 72, 72

Pilos
Pistol

ssptaetciioanlty1579,3208

Placnliemtsato(ldoegsyign2in0g)0, general 194-203

environments 197-198

geology 200

lite 201-203

oceanography 199

orbital characteristics 196-197

physical chemistry 199

types of 194-195
Planetology specialty

87

Plasma jelly (explosive) 180

Plastic explosives 180

PPolainyterbslarnokle497

Poison 59-60. 222

Poor Looks flaw 87, 109

Posteognition specialty 232

Power martial arts specialty 70

Powered armor specially 65

Powered
Powerful Powerful

wAEnelleaymppoyenrkflsap8we5c,8i1a70l,5t1,y0169297

Precognition specialty 232

Prepared Prepared

(to avoid surprise) 58
charges (explosives) 80,

184

Pre5ss2ure, atmospheric prassure 64-65,

Prestidigitation specialty 72,72

PPrriemvearilicnogrdco(enxdpiltoisoinves)201080

Primitive flaw 87, 109

Primitive
7

Ranged

Weapons

broad skill

Processor (computer) 151

Professional equipment 135, 140-141

Professional gauntlet 152, 153, 154

Professions 28-29, 10, 30-32
Programming specialty 75, 80, 151,

167

Programs, Programs,

computer loading

159-167 152

PraongdretsrsavLeelve1ls81684, 44, 130-133, 162

Protection protocols specialty 77, 88 Psionic Awareness perk 86, 105

P!

Psionic Psionics

e2n2e0r,gy22po8in-2ts32628

» PPPsssyyyccchhhooomkloiegnteyryticsspsepcsepicaeilactylitayl7ty2632,82044

Pyrokinetics specialty 234

Race specialty 73, 77

Radiation 62-64, 52

204 Ramming (with a vehicle) 201,

HDER

Ranged attacks 46-48

ammo expenditure 47

iriendly fire 46

point blank 47

RRRaaasnnnugggpeeeprbbmeeesottsdwwiivfeeieeeernnfivs4re3pe,ah55ci00ce,lse7hsi3p1s33,1516,91357

Ranged Weapon attack modifiers 73

rank benefits 75

Ranged weapons (PL 0-PL 4) 175, 178

(PL3) 178

(PLE) 178-179

(PL7) (PL8)

118718-181

73 Ranged Weapons, Modern broad skill

Ranged Weapans, Primitive brosd il

Rflnk beneits, purchasiag 69, 112,65,

Roacton black #, 71

Reaction Reaction

dpoardrgye445,56,871

Reaction scores 37

Reasoning challenge 122

Recovery (from
54-55

damage)

53,

54,

62,

fatigue 54, 62, 55,94

`mortal 54, 54

stun 53,62, 54

wound 54, 54

Reference program 161

Reflexes perk 85, 106, Rejuvenate specialty

127 230

Repair specialty 77-78, 30

Repair, computer 80

Repair, spaceship 163

Reputation perk 86, 106, 127

Resist pain Resistance

specialty modifier

77 3 34, 2,

49,

50

Resistance modifier vs. s 35, 51

Resolve broad Rifle specialty

s7k3ill

79,

94

Robols 272, 169
Roleplaying rewards

102

Roleplaying style 43

Satchel charge 180

Scenes 120, 212-213, 12, 45-47

boosters 213-214

SSSSceeerc`acwamuortorcconiuhhtrdynt-abadslurpbyi55elr43tcod,,iaaa55dmlet32xysapkgl7ieol9ls, i759v71e3,-5s82s,8p5e4cialty 81

Security devices specialty 77, 88

Seduce Sensors

specially 81, (equipment)

100 135, 141-142

Sensors Sensors

specialty 83
station 160-161,

208

Services 147-143

Sesheyan 25-26

Set explosives specialty 81

a0 `Shadow specialty 73,75 Shadow armor program 161, 163

Shadow armor 2 program 161, 163 Shadow form program 161, 165

Spineless flaw Stamina broad

87, 109 skill 61, 73, 77,

105,

108

Shadow Shadow

fwoermap2onprporgorgarmam1611,611, 61563

Star Star

sectors (creating] systems (creating)

1[91-194

Shadow weapon 2 program 161, 163

210 Staxdrive 146, 155, 86,

SSShhhaiiepdlodRwse,sc,oursgderiFodfosru4mi5t 11554,8255

Starting funds 130 Starvation 60
Static program 161, 166

Sidebars, general note 7

Stealth broad skill 50, 72, 74

Sidekicks 91-32

Stealth skills rank benefit 75

SSSiiintgugnatasitopunercediaeileqtyu3i3p9,m31e1nt 31, 111
Situation die modifiers 47, 50, 62

Stored memory (computer) 151

Street knowledge specialty 79,95

Street Smart broad
Strength 19, 32

skill

75,

95

Situation die steps Situations, types of

5129, 48

Strength Strength

and feat

d6a3m-7a0g, 6e 340,

69

62 Skill checks 35, csoinmgplleex623, 61, 5681, 62,

151

'

Strength increase 127

Strength Strength

rseksililssta6n9c-e70m, 6od3if-ie7r0106

Skill Skill

costs 61, 64-65
packages (careers)

111

Stun damage 53, 51
Subdermal Nljack 153,

156,

240,

245

Skill points 34, 61

Success, automatic 35, 48

Skill Skill

points, spending rank benefits 69,

6336,

125

degrees `marginal

of1324, ,6132

Skill Skill

scores 67, 10, 62
situation modifier

50

Suffocation 61
Suggest specialty 236

Skills, broad 67, 61

Super Power FX 225-225

free 68,34, improving

61125

Supercomputer Superconductor

1t5e2c,hn1o3l,og1y55179

purchasing high ranks 31

Superheroic Supporting

cSasFt,18g3e,n1e8r4a,l28235--32525

selection 29

action checks 37, 48

Sling Slow

fslpaewci8a7lt,y17049

ealmlipesloy9e1e-s9322-94

Small business specialty 74,79

experts 94-95

SSSMmneGaarktspGaetIctDaiasclk1tsy557803

followers 92-94 sniodnekpircokfsess9io1n-a9ls289

Sneak Social

ssptaetcuisal1ty0763-,17058

teamwork 48-49 templates 96-99

Sound Space Space

39
opera tactics

SsFpe1c8ia2lty-18833

villains 90 Suppressive fire 50
Surface navigation specialty 87

Space vehicle specialty 76

Surge program 161, 162

Space vehicle statistics 197

Surgery specialty 85

Spaceship combat, general 157-163, Surgery, cybemnetic 85, 239-240

209-211
boarding

160

Surprise 42, 58
modifiers 42, 43

`modifiers to skill checks 160

spaceships 158

nanative surprise

1s5ty8le

158

vehicles 134
Survival broad skill

74,

78

visual style 158-159 Spaceship compariments

140,

205-209

Survival gear 136, 142-145
Survival training specialty 78

16 `computers 140, 168,

Swim specialty 58, 73, 77

damage engines

162-163 140,210

System astrogation specialty 87 System Operation broad skill 77, 88, 165

repair 163

systems `weapons

11440,0,22050, 2908

Spaceship construction 133-155

Spaceship maneuvers 153-159

`modifiers to skill checks 159

Spaceship Spaceship,

scale 158 general 139-163

`armor 148, 14

capital ships 162

chuusltlosm1i3zi9ng 154-155

`maneuverability Record Form 154,

215445

systems 141-154

61 weapons 152-154
Specialty skills 67, 35,
Species, new 24-28 Spending money 129

T'sa 26-28

Tables, general note 7 Tactics broad skill 77, 89, 203

Talents (psionic) 221, 228

Taunt Teach

sbproeacdialstkyil8l18,01, 0915

Teach, specific field specialty

95

Tech Op 29, 10,32

TTeecchhnOicpalcacrheaelrlsen1ge1s6-112137

Technical knowledge specialty 0

89 Technical Science broad skill 77, 44 Technothriller SF 183,

Telekinesis Telepathy

brboraodadsksiklilll223343

Temper flaw 87, 109

`Temperature extremes Templates, supporting

c65a,s5t 926-99

Threaten (combat tactic) 50

Throw specialty 67

Thrown weapons 47, 57

Time Time

tfrraavmeels1(8SF2settings)

177-178

Tire specialty 236
Tough as Nails perk

86,

106,

127

`Toughness, general 52

of objects 56, 174, 190

Trace program 161, 162

Track specialty 79, 93
Trailblazing specialty

73,

77

Trained vs, untrained 67, 68, 63

Transfer damage specialty 230

Transfer program 161, 166

Traps 122

243 Trauma pack 135, 139-140,

Travel 184-186, 148, 149

Treatment specialty 76, 85
Two weapons, attacking with

51,

57

Types of sitbations 59

Typical trader record sheet 206

Unarmed Attack broad skill 70, 69, 105, 108

Unarmed Attack rank benefits 63 Unarmed attacks 43-45

Untrained 63 Utility programs 164-167

WWaetaepronvse,higcelenesrpaolc4ia1lty 76

Veahpipclreocpormiabteat,skgielnlser1al31732-137, 198-204

modifiers to skill checks 135

narrative style 135

surprise 134

visual style 135

Vehicle Vehicle

mOpanereautvioenrsb1r3o5a,d13sk6,ill17928, 76,

98-201

Vehicle scale 134,135, 203, 204

Vehicle Vehicle

tactics specially 89
vs. character combal

204

Vehicles (PL6)

1(P9L50--P1L956)

193,

195

(PL?) 196-197

(PL8) 198
accessories

127-129

armor 132

used 197
`weapons 130-131 Vigor perk 86, 106

accuracy 43

failure 45

Weapons, attacking with two 56, 68, 104

Weapons, electrochemical 180

Weapons, spaceship 152-154, 209

Weapons, thrown 47, 57

Weapons, Weapons

cvoemhipcalretm1e3n0t -11403, 2109

WWeearepnon2s 8s-p3ec0ialty 89

Will 20,33

Will Will

ifnoactre7a8s,e91027

Will Will

rseksililssta7n8c-e80,m9o0d-i9fi5e,r213036, 213094, 230

Willpower perk 86, 107, 127

Wireless NJack Wound damage

52 153, 156,
53,

240,

245

244 X3D 153, 156,
Xenology specialty

76,

84

Xenomedicine specialty 85

RI0KI

Villains 80
Virus program 161, 165
Vision, range of 48, 39,

Zero gravity 62, 56, 216 Zero-g training specialty 71 Zoology specialty 84

Gl: Age Categories by Species s by Species
G4: Advanced Heroes GS: Buying Skills at Hig| PI0: Skills & Resistance Modifiers GE: Degrees of Success G7: Detection Modifiers G8: Visual Detection Ranges G3: Exhaustion PI3: Overland Movement GI0: Mounted Travel P20: Accuracy by Range Gl1: Terrain in Combat
GI5: Electrical Damage P15: Impact Damage GI6: Fire Damage
7: Poison
Gravity Radiation Radiation Effects Breaking Objects Buying & Selling.. G23: Employees
G28 Vehicular Accessorie /ehicular Weapons.
fehicular Armor ..
pening Range.
ehicle Detection Range
/ehicle Detection Modifiers. G34: Ship Hulls:
ompartments

No.
G36: Spaceship Systems G87: Solar Cells . G38: Ship Maneuverability 31 GA9:Ship Acceleration & Cruising Speed 35 Gaz:Spaceship Armor G43: Shipboard Computer Systems G44: Spaceship Weapons G45: Spaceship Opening Range .. G46: Spaceship Detection Range.. G47: Space Detection Modifiers G48: Spaceship Opening Speeds G49: Losing Control of a Spaceship G50: Compartment Hit Location. GS1: Alien Artifact Form G52: Artifact Purpose G53: Alien Artifact as Perk G54: Alien Antifact as Flaw. GS5: Artifact Powers 80 GS6: Artifact DrawBacks 83 GS7: Starlaring Campaign Scale.. 63 G58: Stars in a System .. G549: Single-Star Systems . G60: Multiple-Star Systems. G81: Orbit Tracks G62: Planets G63: Moons G64: Planetary Environments. GBS5: Oceans ....... G66: Climate G67: Landforms . G70: Faith FX Specialty Skill Goste G71: Arcane Magic & Super Power .
FX Specialty Skill Costs G72: FX Energy. G73: FX Energy Costs

Ship name:
Hull &o Captain's name:

Hull size:
Maneuver rating: e
Cruising speed: Starfan distance:

Engines: Sensors: Computers):. Other equipment:

Damage / Damage 1
Damage Defenses: Power plant: Communication:

AT ot IR Ł ot 15 0 FEgisteni trewearieni

Lag TSR, Ine.

TSR, fie . AlIFOHLS [SErveed. Permission cramted

(o personal s

Ship Status Record Form

Ship Stations Command
Pilot
Copilot Communications Damage Control Defenses
Engineering
Sensors Weapons

j Hull Type L

Station Location

Operator's Name

-

o

nla

Captain's Name `

System Lacation

Skilt Score

Colt 9

Bl |S A I{
|I . S
LI

q | A| | A

(I S

|

{S B

Compartment 1:

Compartment 2:

s

O000000D00000000000000

s

00000000000000000000

w

00ooonCco0000oo0nogoog

w

0000o00000000000000g

m

oonooooooo

M

Dooooooooo

Compartment 3:

]

do0ooo0o0ooooodooooo

w

0o000000000000000oong

M

ooooooooog

Compartment 5: s 00000000000000000000 w () oonoooooooooooooooon v () ooooooooon

Compartment 4:

S

5

00000000000000000000

w

OoD0o0ooo00o0oooooooo

M

oonoooooon

Compartment 6:

s

00000000000000000000

w

00000000000000000000

M ooooogoooo

Compartment 7:

5

00000000000000000000

w

00o0oO0000oo0oooooooo

M

oooooooono

Compartment 8:

5

00000000000000000000

w

0000000oo0o0000ooooon

M

oooooooooo

Compartment 9:

]

0o000oo000oooooooooo

w( ) 00D00000000000000000

M oooooooooo

Compartment 10: s 00000000000000000000 w( ) 00000000000000000000 wm () oooooooooo

Compartment 12: s () 00onoooooooooooooooo w( ) 00Dooooooooooooooooo m () oooooooooo

~ SUPPORTING CAST STATISTICAL -Ffinm
To help you read and organize information about supporting cast members presented in published adventures and accessories, this statistical form has been provided. For the sake of example only, this chaxacter makes use of all the optional rules in the Player's Handbook: psionics, cybemetics, and mutations.

The character's
name.

Here are species, profession, and achievement level. For Diplomats, a secondary profession is also listed.

Ability Scores are
the next piece of information. Abili-
ty Scores may be altered by perks,
achievement benefits, mutations, or cybernetics.
Durability, action check scores,
movement rates, actions per round, reaction scores,
and last resort
points are deter-
mined from Ability Scores, but may be altered by options.

Yatril Tor | Ą

Level 1 human Diplomat (Mindwalker) -

SIR 8 [+1]

INT 12 SV

DEX 11 [+1]

WIL 11 [+1]

CON 3

PER 11

Durability: 9/9/5/5

Action check: 12+/11/5/2

#| Move: sprint 18, run 12, walk 4

#Actions: 2

Reaction score: Ordinary/2

Last re;

Perks: Tough as Nails, Psionic Awareness

Flaws: Bad Luck, Temper (moderate)

Psionic energy points: 6

Cyber tolerance score: 3/3/2

Attacks

Unarmed-brawl 9/4/2 d4s/d4+1s/d4+2s

L/o

1lmm ch pistol ~ 12/6/3 d4+2w/d6+2w/d4+1m HI/O

Defenses

Attack forms list

an appropriate

skill age,

asncodret,ydpaem. -

CF softsuit: d6 (LI), d6 (HI), d6-1 (En)
Skills Athletics [8]; Unarmed [8}-braw! [9]; Modern [11}-

4 pistol [12]; Vehicle Operation [11]; Stamina [9];

Knowledge [12}-language (English) [15]; System

A complete list of

Operation [12]; Awareness [11]; Culture [11}-diplo-

the character's Al macy [12], etiquette (Terran Empire) [12]; Interac-

skills in order of

tion [11}-charm [12], taunt [12]; ESP [12iaind reat

their related Abili- |Ł
ty Scores (STR, DEX, CON, INT, WIL, PER) appears here. Broad skills and scores (using

ing [13]; Telepathy [11}-suggest [12]. Gear Comm gear, first aid kit, computer gauntlet, suitcase, formal dress, vacuum mask, English-Germaw |

a +dd base situation die) are in

dictionary.

roman type; spe-

Cyber gear

cialty skills and scores (using a

Cyberoptics

+d0 base situation
die) are in italic.

Mutations
Enhanced Intelligence, Wild Immune System

Cyber gear, if any, Ł is listed here.
Advantageous
mutations and
drawbacks, if any, are listed here.

Yatril Tor represents the culmination of years of research into constructing the perfect diplomat. & tall, handsome human decked out in fine designe clothes, he's a pleasant, if oily, administrator who's subject to bouts of anger and fury that hamper his performance in delicate negotiations. This failing was never more apparent than when he served ... .

Alongside Ability Scores appear re-
sistance modifiers
for each Ability.
#| Resistance modi-
fiers may be al9 tered by perks | and skill rank
benetits.
Perks and flaws
are listed here.

If a character has cyber gear or psionic talents, appropriate scores are here.

Defenses can be found here. Armor,

the most common
delense, lists val-

ues against low impact (L), high

~ impact (HI), and
e(Enenr).gMy odreaumnaugseu-

fael nosreesx,ostuicchdea-s ablative screens

|

or deflection ducers, may

bine-

listed as well.

A Mindwalker's or
talent's psionic skills are listed at the end, in Ability
Score order.

Noteworthy equip-
ment appears
here.

The text following the character's
statistics typically
provides facts on
background, behavior, and appearance.

Planet type

oo

ALTERNITY 15 @ registere

trocosoonk

ovwseed by 1SR, I

IG9H TSK. Inc. All nghts reserw g Prarrnission granted to photocopy for personal use

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
Playtesters
In-House Playtesters: Steve Brown, Michele Carter, Bruce Cordell, Dale Donovan, Bruce Heard, Duane
Maxwell, Steve Miller, Jeff Quick, John Rateliff, Sean Reynolds, Cindi Rice, Steven Schend, Ted Stark, and
David Wise.
Out-of-House Lead Playtesters: Steve Bartell, Ronald C. Bedison, Daren E. McCormick, Mark S. Middleton, Martin L. Shoemaker, Jon Spinner, and David Zinn.
Out-of-House Playtesters: Alok Ajmera, Shirley Anthony, William C. Anthony, Ben Van Atta, Joan M.G. Baggaley, Ken Baggaley, Edward H. Blaylock, Daniel Bourgeois, Jacob Brown, John Bunnell, Gregg Burke, Lisa Cafarelli, Joshua E. Canary, David B. Clopper, Michael A. Cofon, Daniel L. Cooper, David Cotton, Dean Cranney, Steve Crockett, David Cumbo, Paul J. Cumbo, Amanda Cunningham, Michael L. Curran, Brian K. D'Allaird, Troy Daniels, Christopher "Hrothgar" Dilworth, Steven Dunn, Terance L. Eldred, Ted Evans, Diane B. Friel, Richard Gannon, Carl Garner, Ed Gibson, David J. Goehrig, Mary Goehrig, Arty Golding, Shane M. Good, Jenafer Hamilton, Paul Harper, Tim Hernandez, James R. Hunton, Deborah Hunton, Elizabeth Iannotti, Robert W. Tliff, Matthew Jacobs, Michael Jones, Richard H. Keen Jr, Matthew Kershaw, Kyym Kintel, Robert M. Linehan, Billy Littlepage, Amanda Lytle, David F. Manns, Lee McClurkin 1L, Andrec: McCormick, Rian A. McMurtry, Kent L. McNeillie, Nick Meredith, Keven Miller, Peter Miller, Timothy Molineux, Johan Naylor, Rick Naylor II, Cory Nielson, Tanya Nielson, Jeremy Noyes, Charles H. Patterson Jr., David Phillips, Jason Price, Todd Robinson, Douglas A. Roth Jr., Michael V. Serafini, Adam D. Schwaniger, Michael Sims, Jared Snedecor, Patrick "Haethcyn" Spenner, Kenneth Swanson, Alexander Yao, Eljay Wharff, and Craig Wormuth.
References
----. Astrologicus Galaxy Simulation Software. Logicrucible, Inc., 1995. httpi//www.logicrucible.com. ---- Encarta Multimedia Encyclopedia. Microsoft, 1994. -- The Planets, ed. Byron Preiss. Bantam Books, 1985. Bova, Ben. Space Travel. Writer's Digest Books, 1997. Clute, John, and Peter Nichols. The Encyclopedia of Science Fiction. St. Martin's Griffin, 1995. Dickinson, Terrence, and Adolf Shaller. Extraterrestrials: A Field Guide for Earthlings. Camden House Pub-
lishing, 1994. Gallant, Roy A. National Geographic Picture Atlas of Our Universe. National Geographic Society, 1994. Gillett, Stephen L. World-Building. Writer's Digest Books, 19%6. Gribbin, John. Unveiling the Edge of Time. Harmony Books, 1992. Hathaway, Nancy. The Friendly Guide to the Universe. Penguin Books, 1995. Hawking, Stephen. Black Holes and Baby Universes. Bantam Books, 1994. Hazen, Robert M., and James Trefil. Science Matters. Anchor Books, 1992. Henbest, Nigel, and Heather Couper. The Guide to the Galaxy. Cambridge University Press, 1994. Kepner, Terry. Proximity Zero, 2nd edition. The Bob Liddil Group, 1995. Mauldin, John H. Prospects for Interstellar Travel. American Astronomical Society, 1992. Moore, Patrick. Atlas of the Universe. Rand McNally, 1994. Nahin, Paul J. Time Travel, Writer's Digest Books, 1997. Ronan, Colin A. The Universe Explained. Henry Holt and Company, Inc., 1994. Sagan, Carl. Pale Blue Dot. Random House, 1994. Schmidt, Stanley. Aliens and Alien Societies. Writer's Digest Books, 1395. Thorne, Kip. Black Holes & Time Warps. W.W. Norton & Company, Inc, 1994.
256

M 07
Science Fiction Roleplaying Game

by Richard Baker and Bill Slavicsek

the scene opens . . . hostile alien vessels converge on a A starship in the distant reaches of space . . . scientists and doctors examine the dying victim of a mutant strain of bacteria
heavily armored space marines discover an ancient artifact
on a desolate world

I

INE THE FUTURE--ONE EPIC AT A TIME!

This roleplaying game provides a framework for all kinds of contemporary to far-future science fiction adventures. The
Gamemaster Guide, the companion volume to the ALTERNITY
Player's Handbook, contains everything needed to moderate the ALTERNITY game, including:

* Rules for creating memorable supporting characters,
adventures, and campaigns for any SF setting. A "Fast-Play" chapter that teaches the basics of moderating
the game and provides a starting adventure.
Starship construction rules and a tactical space combat system. Comprehensive star system design rules. including stellar classes and planetary environments. More than 30 alien reatures, and dangerous animals to
use as opponent;
Templates that quickly bring supporting characters to lif Guidelines for designing new alien species and alien artifacts.
Adventure triggers to spur your imagination and ignite the action.
* A complete index for both the Player's Handbook and the
Gamemaster Guide
SCANNED BY CHASMK1

ASIA US. CANADA. Av PACIFIC. & LATIN AMERICA

\

EUROPEAN Wizards of

tHhe ECoAast.DBOeUlgAiuRmTERS

Wizards of the Coast. fnc. | `Q (RN

Renton, WAP9O3_B0ox5770-07707

2B30e0lTgiuurmhout

+1:206-624-0833 321443044

Visit our website at wwuw.tsr.com

ALTERNITY and the TSR logo
USA 1888 TSR Inc. All

are registered trademarks
nghts rescrved fade m

owned the

by TSR,

Inc.

inc. TSR Inc. 1 & subsiciary of Wizards of the Cons,

81SBN 0-7869-0729-0
9178078619072
5K

